                                               February 3, 1995
 
MEMORANDUM TO:  Record    
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- W/NMC22
SUBJECT:        Changes to OI/SSI-Data Preprocessor 
                (August 30, 1994 Version)

A new operational version of the data preprocessor program
(PREPDATA) was implemented 1200 UTC 21 September 1994 on the HDS
(REGIONAL version) and 1200 UTC 10 January 1995 on the CRAY
(GLOBAL version).  Except where noted, the changes below affect
both versions of the data preprocessor.


I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     1)  Namelist switches NHWRD, NLWRD and KMAX are no longer
used.  Their values are hardwired within the source based on the
namelist switches SEQNTL and OBUFR.

     2)  Namelist switch TVIRT is no longer used.

     3)  Added namelist switch IREANL to indicate if this is a
reanalysis version of  the program [=0 not reanalysis (default),
=1 reanalysis].

     4)  Namelist switch MARLND now applies to upper-air ocean
stations (Radiosonde, Pibal) as well as to surface marine
stations.  If FALSE and these reports are over land they will
either be flagged for non-use by the analysis (q.m.=15) for
GLOBAL or removed from processing for REGIONAL.

     5)  Added namelist switch IACARL to indicate the lowest
level (in meters) for processing ACARS aircraft reports (default
is 2286, corresponding to 7500 feet).

     6)  Namelist switch IAFTFI can now be set to 2, which
indicates that the input ON29 AIRCFT file contains aircraft
reports that have been modified by the program PREPACQC.  These
reports contain the new set of standard ON29 quality markers.

     7)  In order to increase the program's flexibility, the
following parameter names are now in the source: MXLVL (maximum
number of levels that can be processed), MXWRDL (maximum number
of variables in the output NOBS array for a report level), MXWRDH
(maximum number of variables in the output NOBS array for a
report header), MXNOBS [size of the NOBS array: (MXLVL x MXWRDL)
+ MXWRDH], NUMVAR (number of upper-air observation variables in
the DAT and TMP arrays), NUMQMS (number of upper-air quality mark
values in the IQ and JQ arrays), and NUMDAT (size of the upper-
air DAT and TMP arrays: NUMVAR + NUMQMS).

     8)  Subroutine TOVSID rewritten to improve efficiency.

     9)  Added a new subroutine INTERP (see III.A.2 below).

    10)  Condition code 18 is no longer needed and has been
removed.

    11)  Added condition code 22 for case where characters on
machine are neither ASCII nor EBCDIC.

    12)  If the ADPUPA file is empty or null, then the date is
read from the NMC production date file regardless of the
IUNIT(28) date switch.  Also in this case, the dump time is set
to missing.  Prior to this, the program stopped with a condition
code of 19.  (Allows reanalysis jobs to run even if no ADPUPA
data is present.) 

    13)  GLOBAL: If, upon the last call to subroutine W3FIZZ
(BUFR storage initiator for each report), no data at all have
been processed, then an empty ADPUPA Table A entry message is
opened so that the date is available in the empty BUFR data set. 
This is for the reanalysis effort.

    14)  GLOBAL: The elevation is now stored in word 11 of the
output NOBS array for a report header, and is encoded in BUFR.

    15)  GLOBAL: The report sequence number is now stored in word
12 of the output NOBS array for a report header, and is encoded
in BUFR.  (Currently applies only to ACARS and conventional
AIREP/PIREP and ASDAR aircraft reports.)

    16)  GLOBAL: The reported wind direction and speed (knots)
are now stored in word 6 and 7 of the output NOBS array for a
wind report level, respectively, and are encoded in BUFR.  Added
entry CMDDFF to subroutine UV to convert the u- and v- components
back to direction and speed prior to writing them to the NOBS
array.

    17)  GLOBAL: The calculated virtual temperature and reported
dewpoint temperature are now stored in word 6 and 7 of the output
NOBS array for a mass report level, respectively, and are encoded
in BUFR.


    18)  GLOBAL: The true "reported" temperature is now stored in
word 3 of the output NOBS array for a mass report level and is
encoded in BUFR.  (For all data types except TOVS retrievals,
this is sensible temperature.  For TOVS retrievals this is
virtual temperature.)

    19)  Virtual temperature is now calculated in subroutines
STOROB and STORXX just prior to the writing out to the NOBS
array.

    20)  Program now determines the machine character type
directly rather than assuming that machine with word length 8 is
always ASCII and machine with word length 4 is always EBCDIC.

    21)  The test for missing latitude or longitude expanded to
include unreasonable values (outside possible range).  Such
reports are tossed.

    22)  Increased length of stored report station identification
from CHARACTER*6 to CHARACTER*8 (variable STNID).

    23)  GLOBAL: Updated BUFR user table to be more like that in
reanalysis version.  Makes use of new mnenomics in user table.

    24)  GLOBAL: Compiles with updated bufrk version of bufr.o
library.


II.  SPECIFIC OPERATIONAL CHANGES

   A.   CHANGES TO UPPER-AIR DATA PROCESSING

     1)  GLOBAL: Category 4 levels are now processed regardless
of the number of category 1, 3 and 5 levels in the report.  Prior
to this, category 4 levels were not processed if their number was
less than the sum of category 1, 3 and 5 levels (and they still
are not processed for REGIONAL).

     2)  GLOBAL: Any category 2 or 3 level that reports below the
surface pressure level is no longer skipped in the processing of
a report.  All variables in the level, however, are flagged for
non-use by the analysis (q.m.=15).

     3)  GLOBAL: If the calculated virtual temperature on a level
is > 375 K (or > 325 K above 100 mb), the dewpoint temperature is
no longer set to missing. (It is still set to missing for
REGIONAL.)

     4)  GLOBAL: For radiosonde reports failing the baseline
check, all variables on category 4 levels below the top spanning
pressure level are now flagged for non-use by the analysis
(q.m.=15).  Prior to this, such category 4 levels were removed
from processing (and they still are not processed for REGIONAL).

     5)  GLOBAL: All duplicate pressure level checks now check
for duplicate pressure to the nearest tenth of a millibar.  Prior
to this the check was to the
nearest whole millibar (and it still is for REGIONAL).

     6)  GLOBAL: Category 4 calculated pressure is now stored to
the nearest
tenth of a millibar.  Prior to this is was rounded to the nearest
whole millibar (and it still is for REGIONAL).

     7)  GLOBAL: All levels above the highest level with non-
missing height and temperature are now processed in both mass and
wind pieces.  Prior to this, all such levels were excluded from
processing (and they still are for REGIONAL).

   B.   CHANGES TO AIRCRAFT DATA PROCESSING

     1)  GLOBAL: The seventh character of the station
identification to now stored in the variable STNID for each
AIREP/PIREP report where applicable.  It is obtained from ON29
reserve character 26 after 17 April 1991.  Also, a complete eight
character STNID may be generated for those reports where the
known carrier ID is incorrect.

     2)  GLOBAL: The receipt time and report subtype [indicating
whether this is (=1) or is not (=0) a Carwsell/Tinker AFB
processed report] are now encoded into the report header in BUFR
for conventional AIREP/PIREP and ASDAR reports.  This information
is needed in the PREPACQC program that runs later.

     3)  GLOBAL: The namelist switch AWINDO has been changed from
300. to 325. for conventional AIREP/PIREP and ASDAR reports. 
This allows the program PREPACQC (which runs later) to obtain
more data for the track check.  PREPACQC will then only allow
reports within a +/- 3-hour window to be processed. (AWINDO is
still 300. for these reports for REGIONAL.)

     4)  GLOBAL: The namelist switch PGAFUS has been changed from
TRUE to FALSE for conventional AIREP/PIREP and ASDAR reports. 
This allows the program PREPACQC (which runs later) to make use
of all these data.  PREPACQC will then exclude such reports
outside the continental U.S. (if ACARS available) in its final
output.  (PGAFUS is still TRUE for these reports for REGIONAL.)

   C.   CHANGES TO SURFACE DATA PROCESSING

     1)  If EITHER the direction or the speed for a report is
missing, then the wind piece for the report is not processed. 
Prior to this, only the speed was checked.  In this prior case,
if only the direction was missing the wind was processed into u-
and v-components with 99999 used for the direction!

   D.   CHANGES TO SSM/I DATA PROCESSING

     1)  GLOBAL:  The SSM/I retrievals of total column
precipitable water will now be used operationally by the AVIATION
and FINAL analyses.  The namelist switch JPSSMI(2) is set to 0. 
The time window is +/- 3-hours.

   E.   CHANGES TO SATELLITE WIND DATA PROCESSING

     1)  The ON29 SATWND file now contains new quality markers
for some of the NESDIS cloud-drift wind reports.  The quality
markers are based on a recursive filter flag that NESDIS assigns
to the winds.  Winds can be marked as good, neutral, suspect or
bad.  Bad winds have never been written into the SATWND file, and
they still are not.  PREPDATA can now recognize these new quality
markers and reformat them into the proper BUFR/PREPDA table
values.  Prior to this, all satellite winds had neutral quality
markers. (NOTE:  This change was implemented in the REGIONAL/HDS
version of PREPDATA  on 1200 UTC 02 November 1994.)



III. SPECIFIC NON-OPERATIONAL CHANGES

   A.   CHANGES TO TOVS DATA PROCESSING
     
     1)  If the TOVS NMCEDS directory (houskeeping) file is empty
or null, the TOVS data is assumed to be packed in Office Note 29
format rather than in NMCEDS format.  This is for the reanalysis
effort. (Only if namelist switch TOVEDS is true.)

     2)  In the 36-day disk archive processing of TOVS data, a
new subroutine INTERP has been added to interpolate the TOVS
interactive temperature and specific humidity retrievals (in the
Northern Hemisphere) onto mandatory levels up to 10 mb.  This
allows increment archive programs to calculate statistics for
these data on mandatory levels (effective 0000 UTC 31 August
1994).