                                                August 25, 1995

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- W/NMC22
Subject:        Changes to OI/SSI-Data Preprocessor
                (July 12, 1995 Version)

The July 12, 1995 version of the data preprocessor program
(PREPDATA) was updated for the second time. UPDATE #2 was
implemented as a CRISIS JIF on 1200 UTC 28 August 1995 on both
the HDS and CRAY machines.  Except where noted, the changes below
affect both versions of the data preprocessor.


********************  U P D A T E   # 2  ***********************
 
 
I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     1)  The default value for namelist switch FWINDO(5) has been
changed from 300. to 600. (hours).


II.  SPECIFIC OPERATIONAL CHANGES

   A. CHANGES TO RECONNAISSANCE AND DROPWINSONDE DATA PROCESSING
        (See end of this document for more information on the
         corrections made to the processing of these data.) 

     1) In the previous version, the reported elevation was
assigned as the height of the surface level for type 182 reports. 
This was and still is correct for type 182 splash-level drops
which report an elevation of zero over water.  However, the type
182 low-level reccos, which report an estimate of sea-level
pressure, report the flight-level altitude as elevation.  Since
these flights are several hundred meters above the ground this
lead to large residuals in the heights of these estimated sea-
level pressures.  The program GLOBAL OIQC program had thrown out
most of the data, but some had gotten through.  The change will
hardwire the height of these low-level recco report type 182
surface data to zero.

     2) GLOBAL: The previous version contained a lower-limit of
938 mb for accepting type 182 pressures.  Pressures below this
limit were flagged as bad, and the report was not used by the
analysis.  During strong hurricanes, a valid sea-level pressure
less than this limit could be reported by a drop.  This lower
limit is being changed to 800 mb to allow such data to pass
through.  If a type 182 pressure truly is bad, the GLOBAL OIQC
should flag it.  The REGIONAL version is not being changed, since
the REGIONAL OIQC program's response to bad pressures here is
uncertain.

     3) GLOBAL: All surface mass data in the type 132 drops, as
well as the estimated sea-level pressure (and height) in the type
132 low-level reccos, are now flagged for non-use by the analysis
regardless of its quality or value.  This is being done for two
reasons:
          a) This surface information is already provided to the 
             analysis in the type 182 reports.  This will remove
             the redundancy of information.  
          b) The type 182 pressures are quality controled by the 
             GLOBAL OIQC program, but the type 132 surface (sea-
             level) pressures are not.  In addition, the CQCHT 
             program does not quality control type 132 reports.  
             If the reported sea-level pressure is bad, it would 
             get through to the analysis as a type 132. 

     4) In a rerun case for 06Z 07 February 1995, a dropwinsonde
was incorrectly coded into ON29 with all cat. 2 level pressure
values of zero.   In the previous version's GLOBAL processing of
the type 182 sea- (splash) level pressure report, the 0 mb
pressure was flagged as bad (since it was below the acceptable
limit of 938 mb), but it was retained since there was no lower
limit for processing surface (sea-level) pressure.  (In the
REGIONAL, levels with a pressure below the limit were/are
skipped, so the report was not processed.)  The subsequent GLOBAL
PREVENTS program failed when it encountered this 0 mb pressure
value.  PREPDATA is changed to place a lower-limit on the sea-
level pressure in a type 182 report.  The report will not be
processed if the pressure is less than 1 mb in the GLOBAL and 50
mb in the REGIONAL. 

     5) GLOBAL: The time window for processing type 182 reports
is changed from 3-hours to 6-hours on each side of the cycle
time.  This will be consistent with the time window for
preocessing type 132/232 recco/drops (see I.1 above).


III.  SPECIFIC NON-OPERATIONAL CHANGES

   A. CHANGES TO GOES-I SATELLITE RETRIEVAL PROCESSING 

     1) The temperature, height, and specific humidity on the
"surface" level of a sounding are now given at best a suspect
quality mark.  (This is not done for output to the 36-day
archive.).  In the REGIONAL, the surface level of the mass report
gets a suspect quality mark of '3'.


===================================================================

      Corrections to the Processing of Reconnaissance Data
                                
                         Dennis Keyser
                                
                       12Z 28 August 1995

Prior to 12Z 28 August 28 1995 the oi-data preprocessor
(PREPDATA) processed entire flight-level reconnaissance and
dropwinsonde reports with report types 132(mass) and 232(wind). 
In addition, the surface level of the drops (splash-level) and
the estimated sea-level pressure reported from a low-level recco
flight were processed as marine surface reports with type
182(mass).  

Several problems in PREPDATA's processing of the type 182 reports
were discovered in August 1995.  I am submitting a crisis JIF of
PREPDATA to correct these problems, which I have listed below. 
This will be implemented at 12Z on 28 August 1995.

     1) Prior to the fix: PREPDATA was assigning the reported
elevation to the height of the surface level in type 182.  This
was correct for splash-level drops which report an elevation of
zero over water.  However, the low-level reccos report the
flight-level altitude as elevation.  Since these flights are
several hundred meters above the ground this led to large
residuals in the heights of these estimated sea-level pressures. 
OIQC in the GLOBAL system had thrown out most of the data, but
some had gotten through.  Both the REGIONAL and GLOBAL versions
of PREPDATA are being changed to hardwire the height of these
surface data to zero.

     2) Last week (prior to the fix) during hurricane Felix,
several drops reported a sea-level pressure less than the lower
limit of 938 mb for acceptance by PREPDATA.  ALL surface types
with pressures below this limit were flagged as bad.  The GLOBAL
version of PREPDATA is being changed to accept pressures as low
as 800 mb for type 182 (the limit is still 938 mb for all other
surface types).  If a type 182 pressure truly is bad, the GLOBAL
OIQC should flag it.
The REGIONAL version of PREPDATA is not being changed, since the
REGIONAL OIQC's response to bad 182 pressures is uncertain.

     3) The GLOBAL version of PREPDATA is being changed to flag
all surface mass data in the type 132 drops and the estimated
sea-level pressure (and height) in the type 132 low-level reccos,
regardless of its quality or value.  This is being done for two
reasons:
          a) This surface information is already provided to the
             analysis in the type 182 reports.  This change will
             remove the redundancy of information.  
          b) The type 182 pressures are QC'd by the GLOBAL OIQC,
             but the type 132 surface (sea-level) pressure is not
             In addition, CQCHT does not QC type 132 reports.     
          Prior to the fix, if the reported sea-level pressure
             was bad, it would have gotten through to the    
          analysis as a type 132. 
The REGIONAL version of PREPDATA is not being changed to flag
such data.

     4) In a rerun case for 06Z 07 February 1995 using the
version of PREPDATA before this fix (by Bert Katz), a
dropwinsonde was incorrectly coded into ON29 with all significant
level pressure values of zero.  PREPDATA has a lower limit for
processing upper-air pressure levels; 1 mb in the GLOBAL system
and 50 mb in the REGIONAL system.  All levels with pressure below
this limit are skipped.  Thus, these levels with 0 mb pressure
were not included in the type 132/232 drops report.  In the
processing of the type 182 sea- (splash) level pressure report,
the 0 mb pressure was flagged as bad (since it was below the
acceptable limit of 938 mb), but it was retained since there was
no lower limit for processing surface (sea-level) pressure in the
GLOBAL system.  (In the REGIONAL system, levels with a pressure
below the limit were skipped, so the report was not processed.) 
The subsequent GLOBAL PREVENTS program failed when it encountered
this 0 mb pressure value. The REGIONAL and GLOBAL versions of
PREPDATA are being changed to place a limit on the sea-level
pressure in a type 182 report.  The report will not be processed
if the pressure is less than 1 mb in the GLOBAL and 50 mb in the
REGIONAL (same as pressure check for all levels in the upper-air
data). 

     5) The time window for processing reccos and drops in the
GLOBAL version of PREPDATA is 6-hours on each side of the cycle
time for types 132/232.  However, for the type 182 it had been
just 3-hours on each side of the cycle time.  The GLOBAL version
of PREPDATA is being changed to give type 182 reports a 6-hour
window about the cycle time.