                                                August 25, 1995

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- W/NMC22
Subject:        Changes to OI/SSI-Data Preprocessor
                (July 12, 1995 Version)

The July 12, 1995 version of the data preprocessor program
(PREPDATA) was updated for the first time.  UPDATE #1 was
implemented on 1200 UTC 26 July 1995 on the HDS (REGIONAL
version) and on 1200 UTC 14 August 1995 on the CRAY (GLOBAL
version).


********************  U P D A T E   # 1  ***********************
 
I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     1)  GLOBAL: Added call to bufr.o library routine UFBQCD (in
subroutine W3FIZZ).  Returns program code associated with
PREPDATA program (set to 01).  The program code for all
observational variables is now encoded in the BUFR/PREPDA file. 
New mnemonics added for each observational data type.

     2)  Program can now process a REGIONAL-type BUFR/PREPDA
file.  Temporarily, there must be a distinction between REGIONAL
and GLOBAL when switch OBUFR = TRUE.  This is because the RFERR
program will, for now, reformat the REGIONAL BUFR/PREPDA back to
the old Office Note PREPDA format.  This distinction is made
through checking namelist switch IRNMRK (< 3 - REGIONAL, else -
GLOBAL).  The REGIONAL BUFR/PREPDA file is temporarily different
from the GLOBAL BUFR/PREPDA file as follows: 
        a) The duplicate level pressure checks in the REGIONAL
compare pressures to the nearest whole mb, not to the nearest
tenth of a mb as in the GLOBAL.
        b) The duplicate height check in the REGIONAL compares
heights to the nearest whole meter, not to the nearest 100'th of
a meter as in GLOBAL.
        c) Will encode levels with all data missing except
pressure in the REGIONAL.  The GLOBAL tosses any such levels.
This ensures that the number of levels in the mass and wind
pieces will always be the same for the same report.  
        d) In the REGIONAL: ADPUPA, SATEMP, and PROFLR types
encode the first "level" which contains only surface pressure. 
Everything else on the level is missing. 

     
     3) All logic regarding the processing of the old VAS
retrievals has been removed.  Namelist switches VASDTA and IDVAS
are removed.  Variable ISATOB = 3 now refers to GOES-I retrievals
rather than VAS retrievals.

     4) In namelist switches IWINDO, SATMST, SATLND, KTOP, and
IRTRV, element 2 values 5 and 6 now refer to GOES-I even and odd
satellites, respectively (used to refer to VAS even and odd
satellites).

     5) For precipitable water reports, the NOBS array can now
have more that one level.  Before, the value in the pressure-slot
of the single level report was always hardwired to 1000 "mb". 
Now, this value tags the "type" of precipitable water:
              1 "mb" -- total column (SSM/I)
              2 "mb" -- sfc to 300 mb layer (RAOBS)
              3 "mb" -- 1000 to 300 mb layer (TOVS)
              4 "mb" -- 1.0 to 0.9 sigma layer (GOES-I)
              5 "mb" -- 0.9 to 0.7 sigma layer (GOES-I)
              6 "mb" -- 0.7 to 0.3 sigma layer (GOES-I)
              7 "mb" -- 0.3 to 0.0 sigma layer (GOES-I)
Here, GOES-I precipitable water reports can have up to four
"levels".

     6) GLOBAL: Added new mnemonics PWxO, PWxQ, PWxP , where x (=
1-4) refers to four GOES-I sigma layer precipitable water types
in 5) above.  The last character O refers to the observation, Q
refers to the quality mark, and P refers to the program code. 
This allows precipitable water to be encoded into the BUFR/PREPDA
file.  Also, the pressure observation (POB) is now set to missing
for all precipitable water reports.  Prior to this, a bogus
pressure of 1000 mb was stored with each report.

     7)  GLOBAL: Added new mnemonics BTx , {where x (= 1-7)
refers to the seven channels of SSM/I brightness temperature},
BTQ (quality mark on all channels of SSM/I brightness
temperature), and BTP (program code on all channels of SSM/I
brightness temperature).  This allows SSM/I brightness
temperatures to be encoded into the BUFR/PREPDA file. 

     8) Report types 151-159 are now used exclusively for
precipitable water reports.  Report types 151-153 are as before,
report types 154-155 are currently not used, report type 156 is
for GOES-I land/clear, report type 157 is for GOES-I land/cloudy,
report type 158 is for GOES-I ocean/clear, and report type 159 is
for GOES-I ocean/cloudy.

     


     9) GLOBAL:  Added output argument IERF to subroutine FILLX
as a return code.  If upon return it has a value of 1, this
indicates that the report was not encoded to the BUFR/PREPDA file
due to a problem in subrouitne W3FIZZ.  This allows data count
summaries to be corrected for any such non-decoded reports.

    10) GLOBAL: Added output argument IER to subroutine W3FIZZ as
a return code.  If upon return it has a value of 1, this
indicates that the report was not encoded to the BUFR/PREPDA file
due to a problem in this subroutine.  This allows data count
summaries to be corrected for any such non-decoded reports.

    11) Corrected the standard output print of the NOBS array
contents for GOES-I soundings and for precipitable water from all
types.

    12) Subroutine SNDTBL modified to summarize GOES-I retrieval
counts.  The old VAS retrieval count logic was removed.

    13) New input unit {namelist switch IUNIT(8), set to 35}
points to file containing GOES-I BUFR messages.  All "timely"
messages can be rewritten to file in new output unit {namelist
switch IUNIT(14), set to unit 55}.

    14) New input unit (set to 21) points to file containing VAD
wind BUFR messages.  All "timely" messages can be rewritten to
file in new output unit {namelist switch IUNIT(15), set to unit
56}.

    15) Climatology reports (obsolete) are now tossed if 
encountered.  They used to receive report type 140, but that
report type has now been redefined (see III.C.1 below).

    16) Added namelist switch PHIACF to define latitude bands for
selecting aircraft reports.

    17) Expanded namelist switches JAWIND, JAMASS and AIRLND from
one-dimensional 4-word arrays to two-dimensional (6,4) - word
arrays.  The new latitude band index {see 16) above} is added in
the first element of the array.  This allows aircraft reports to
be selected for processing according to the latitude band they
reside in. A table has been added to summarize aircraft report
counts by latitude bands.

    18) The data search grid no longer applies to aircraft
reports (all types).  The namelist switches JAMASS and JAWIND now
control aircraft selection by latitude bands {see 17) above}.



    19) GLOBAL: Existing mnemonic TSB (report subtype) now holds
a '2' to indicate an ASDAR/AMDAR aircraft report has a missing
phase of flight indicator.  Normally, when this is missing it
indicates the aircraft is banking, and the data should be
considered suspect.  In fact, the program PREPACQC will later set
such reports as suspect.  Prior to this, TSB was only used by
conventional AIREP/PIREP aircraft reports. 



II.  SPECIFIC OPERATIONAL CHANGES

   A. CHANGES TO TOVS SATELLITE RETRIEVAL PROCESSING 

     1) GLOBAL: TOVS(BUFR) retrievals now encode the moisture
quality mark directly from the NOBS quality mark value for
moisture (for output to BUFR/PREPDA file).  Prior to this, the
temperature quality mark was used to as the moisture quality mark
(as it currently is for all other data types).  NOTE:  This also
applies to the non-operational GOES-I soundings.

  B. CHANGES TO RADIOSONDE, PIBAL and RECCO DATA PROCESSING 

     1) GLOBAL: Surface pressures that are outside the DVAL
limit, or pressures on any level that are greater than 1075 mb
but less that 3275 mb are now processed but the pressure quality
marker is flagged as bad (15).  This will allow the pressures to
later be corrected in the Complex Quality Control program.  Prior
to this, such pressure levels were never processed.  Related to
this: a) any data except moisture that are interpolated/
integrated from a spanning level with a bad pressure quality
marker will receive a bad quality marker (15), moisture will be
set to missing; b) any data except moisture that are
interpolated/integrated onto a level which has a pressure with a
bad quality marker will receive a bad quality marker (15),
moisture will be set to missing; c) all data on a category 4
level whose pressure is determined from a spanning level with a
bad pressure quality marker will receive a bad quality marker
(15); c) virtual temperatures are not calculated on levels that
have a bad pressure quality marker; d) specific humidity is not
calculated on levels that have a bad pressure quality marker. 

     2) For recco data only: On 1200 UTC 14 August of 1995, NMC
Automation Division made several corrections to the ON29 recco
decoder in order to fix several long-standing errors.  The most
significant error is the assignment of the temperature, moisture,
and wind data to the nearest geopotential level rather than to
the true pressure altitude in the ON29 category 1 single-level
recco reports.  Several years ago this error, and indeed all of
the other errors now being corrected by the updated decoder, was
discovered and accounted for by adding special logic to PREPDATA. 
In order to minimize changes to PREPDATA to now account for the
fixes in the decoder, the "corrected" recco reports are
reformatted back to their old "uncorrected" format.  The earlier
logic built into PREPDATA will then continue to output the
correct information to the PREPDA file.  



III.  SPECIFIC NON-OPERATIONAL CHANGES

   A. NEW GOES-I SATELLITE RETRIEVAL PROCESSING 

     1) Added new subroutine GOESDG to processes GOES-I retrieval
data (both profiles and precipitable water in 4 layers: 1.0 to
.9, .9-.7, .7-.3, and .3-0. sigma).  Namelist switches GOESND and
GOESPW added.  For profiles, the report types 164(174) are now
assigned to land(ocean) clear retrievals and the report types
165(175) are now assigned to land(ocean) cloudy retrievals. 
(These report types used to be reserved for VAS clear and partly-
cloudy soundings.)  See I.8 above for report types for
precipitable water.

     2) GOES-I counts are accumulated according to the number
decoded, the number of precipitable water retrievals processed,
the number of soundings processed, and the number of decoded
retrievals skipped for various reasons.

   B. CHANGES TO SSM/I RETRIEVAL PROCESSING 

     1) GLOBAL: Now processes SSM/I seven-channel brightness
temperatures from DMSP satellites.  These get report type 102. 
Namelist switches JPSSMI and XWINDO expanded from (6,2) to (6,3)
arrays, where element 2 value 3 refers to seven-channel
brightness temperatures.

   C. CHANGES TO SATELLITE "WIND" DATA PROCESSING

     1) The report types for high-level satellite single-level
mass (temperature) reports have been changed.  Previously they
were in the 154-159 range.  They are now combined with low-level
reports of the same type in the 140-149 range.  (This opens up
the 151-159 types for precipitable water, see I.8 above.)  There
is no longer a need to distinguish low and high level types here. 
Also, the specific mass types in 140-149 now correspond directly
to the wind report types in 240-249 and 250-259.  The wind types
are still split according to low and high level but have been
redefined slightly {see 2) below}. 


     2)  Report types for satellite single level wind and
temperature reports have been redefined as follows:
              240/250/140 - NESDIS produced GOES-ODD satellite
cloud-drift (used to be GOES-ALL satellite) (GOES-ODD are
operational so no change operationally)
              241/251/141 - no change: INSAT cloud-drift (non-
operational)
              242/252/142 - no change: JAPAN cloud-drift
(operational)
              243/253/143 - no change: METEOSAT cloud-drift
(operational)
              244/254/144 - NESDIS produced GOES-EVEN satellite
cloud-drift (used to be NESDIS produced METEOSAT cloud-drift)
(non-operational)
              245/255/145 - NESDIS produced METEOSAT cloud-drift
(used to empty) (non-operational)
              246/256/146 - no change: GOES-ALL gradient
(operational)
              247/257/147 - no change: empty
              248/258/148 - NESDIS produced METEOSAT water-vapor
(used to be NESDIS produced GOES-ALL water-vapor) (non-
operational)
              249/259/149 - NESDIS produced GOES-ALL water-vapor
(used to be NESDIS produced METEOSAT water-vapor) (non-
operational).

This was done primarily to give the GOES-EVEN and GOES-ODD
satellite cloud-drift reports unique report types.

   D.  NEW VAD (NEXRAD) WIND PROCESSING 

     1) Can now process VAD (NEXRAD) winds-by-height data.
Namelist switches VADWND and MWINDO added.  These data receive
report type 224.
