                                              September 4, 1996

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- W/NP22
Subject:        Changes to OI/SSI-Data Preprocessor
                (July 12, 1995 Version -- UPDATE # 5)

The July 12, 1995 version of the data preprocessor program
(PREPDATA) was updated for the fifth time.  UPDATE #5 was
implemented on 1200 UTC 02 October 1996 on the CRAY.  All changes
now affect only OBUFR = TRUE switch.  Except where noted, the
changes below affect both the GLOBAL and RGL/ETA models.

*********************  U P D A T E   # 5  ***********************


I.  GENERAL CHANGES

      1) Added new namelist switch IEDSTP which will indicate the
type of input file from which unpacked NMCEDS formatted TOVS
retrievals are returned for RGL/ETA processing (TOVEDS=TRUE). 
IEDSTP=1 indicates the actual NMCEDS formatted file; IEDSTP=2
indicates the new BUFR dump file.  (Default is IEDSTP=1.  The
NMCEDS file is still used operationally.)

      2) Default values for namelist switch IUNIT changed to
reflect the addition of the odd GOES-I retrieval satellite (see
III.A.1).
 
      3) If either an error or an end-of-file is detected when
reading the fixed land-sea-U.S. mask file in IUNIT(3), the
program now abnormally stops with a condition code of 49.  Prior
to this, the program would run normally however it would ignore
the land/sea or U.S. in/out checks for certain data types, even
if such checks were set-up in the namelist switches.

      4) Expanded the sizes of arrays for namelist switches
SWINDO, SWNLND, JSWIND, JSMASS to include new (but not-yet-
operational) high-density cloud-drift and water-vapor satellite-
derived winds (and cloud temperatures) from NESDIS (see III.B.1).

      5) Added new namelist switch TOVRAD which, when TRUE, will
allow for the processing of TOVS radiances from the new BUFR dump
file for GLOBAL processing (TOVBFR=TRUE).  (Default is
TOVRAD=FALSE.  The logic to process TOVS radiances is not yet in
place (see III.C.1).

 


      6) Added new subroutines W3FIZX and FIZZ0X which are like
existing subroutines W3FIZZ and FIZZ01 except they are set-up to
process TOVS radiances in association with a change in the BUFR
mnemonic table.  These are not actually called anywhere in the
program.  The will eventually be renamed to the existing
subroutine names (replacing them) once the logic to process the
TOVS radiances and the new mnemonic table are in place (see
III.C.1).

      7) Added new namelist switch MSGPSF which, when TRUE, will
process surface land reports within the LFM domain with missing
station pressure and missing sea-level pressure.  In this case,
the sea-level pressure is stored as missing and the station
pressure is stored as the U.S. Standard Atmosphere value (based
on the reported elevation and temperature values).  Before, such
reports were always excluded from processing (and they still are
if outside the LFM domain).  A $ is placed in the 6'th character
of the station id in order to identify such reports.  In
addition, the calculated specific humidity for such reports is
given a quality marker of suspect since the pressure is used in
the calculation.  (Default is MSGPSF=FALSE.  The default value is
currently used in all operational systems.  Switch was set to
TRUE for special high-resolution ETA model Olympic runs in August
1996.) 

      8) Logic added to check for wind speed in meters per second
times 10 which is stored in Office Note 29, category 8, code
figure 924.  Currently no operational data types store this,
however special ACARS data sets, high-density satellite derived
wind data sets (NESDIS), and surface mesonet data sets used in
the special high-resolution ETA model Olympic runs (August 1996)
did store this.
     

II.  SPECIFIC OPERATIONAL CHANGES

  A. CHANGES TO TOVS SATELLITE RETRIEVAL PROCESSING

      1) RGL/ETA: Although not yet switched on (see I.1 above),
logic is now in place to return TOVS retrievals in NMCEDS format
from the new BUFR dump file for TOVS data.  A new subroutine is
called, W3TOVEDS, to decode the BUFR messages and return a
retrieval in this format.  The BUFR file will use the same unit
number as the old NMCEDS file did.  The unit numbers that
currently hold the flag and directory files for the NMCEDS file
will no longer be used once the switch is made.




  B. CHANGES TO WIND PROFILER PROCESSING

      1) Logic for processing wind profiler reports will no
longer require that the BUFR messages have only edition 0 or 2. 
This is a result of a future (planned December 1996) change in
the edition number of wind profiler BUFR messages from 2 to 3. 
Those quality markers that were previously identified only for
edition 2 are now valid for all editions of 2 or greater.

      2) For BUFR edition 2 or greater, levels with quality code
indicator of 2 (shear check and/or median check not performed or
inconclusive) now get a PREPBUFR table value (q.m.) of 11 (BAD) and 
they will not be used by any analyses.  Before, such levels
received a table value (q.m.) of 2 (neutral quality) and were
subject to assimilation.


III.  SPECIFIC NON-OPERATIONAL CHANGES

   A. CHANGES TO GOES-I SATELLITE RETRIEVAL PROCESSING

      1) Updated logic to process retrievals from both the even
GOES satellite (currently GOES-08) and the odd GOES satellite
(currently GOES-09).  Before only the even satellite was set-up
for processing.  Each satellite read in via a unique unit number. 
Also, unique unit number assigned for each satellite for re-
written BUFR messages within the +/- 3-hour time window.

      2) Improved the way the center time and time window are
passed into an updated version of the retrieval unpacker, W3FI77.


   B. CHANGES TO SATELLITE-DERIVED WIND PROCESSING

      1) Updated logic to process new high-density cloud-drift
and water-vapor winds (and cloud temperatures) produced by
NESDIS.  New and changed OI/SSI report types are:
   241/141 - High-density GOES-ODD  satellite visible cloud drift
   245/145 - High-density GOES-ODD  satellite IR cloud drift
   246/146 - High-density GOES-EVEN satellite IR cloud drift
   247/147 - High-density GOES-ODD  satellite imager water vapor
   248/148 - High-density GOES-EVEN satellite imager water vapor
   249/149 - High-density GOES-EVEN satellite visible cloud drift
   251     - Conventional Indian satellite cloud drift (no mass
             part processed, high and low levels)
   256     - Conventional GOES satellite gradient (no mass part
             processed, high and low levels)
   259     - Conventional GOES satellite water vapor (no mass
             part processed, high and low levels)  
   267/167 - High-density GOES-ODD  satellite sounder water vapor
   268/168 - High-density GOES-EVEN satellite sounder water vapor

     
   C. CHANGES TO TOVS RADIANCE PROCESSING

      1) Logic is partially in place to process the 27 TOVS
radiances.