                                               November 6, 1997

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- W/NP22
Subject:        Changes to OI/SSI-Data Preprocessor
                (May 1, 1997 Version -- UPDATE # 4)

The May 1, 1997 version of the data preprocessor program
(PREPDATA) was updated for a fourth time.  UPDATE #4 was
implemented on 1200 UTC 29 July 1997.  All changes now affect
only OBUFR = TRUE switch.  Except where noted, the changes below
affect both the GLOBAL and RGL/ETA models. PREPDATA now
exclusively uses JBUFR file input.

*********************  U P D A T E   # 4  ***********************

I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     1) Corrected some COMMON block and subroutine argument
inconsistencies that may have contributed to storage being
"clobbered".

     2) Established a new PREPBUFR Table A message type GOESND to
hold GOES-I radiances and retrievals.  Prior to this, GOES-I data
would have been combined with TOVS data under the SATEMP Table A
message type.  This change allows GOES-I data to be identified
quicker in the PREPBUFR file.  TOVS data remains under Table A
message type SATEMP.  Note: GOES-I data is still not processed
operationally into the PREPBUFR file.

     3) The input prep.bufrtable file was modified to add the new
Table A message type GOESND (see 2 above).

     4) Elements 21-30 in the namelist switch IWINDO, which
pertain to the time window for GOES-I data acceptance, were
modified from whole hours to hours x 100 (still integer).  This
allows a more precise time window for these data.  Note: Since
these data are not operational, the operational data cards had
been modified in preparation for this source change without a
formal JIF.  Elements 1-20, the time window for TOVS and DMSP
data, are still expected to be in whole hours as before.