                                                October 9, 1998

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to 3DVAR/OI/SSI-Data Preprocessor
                (September 21, 1998 Version -- UPDATE # 1)

The September 21, 1998 version of the data preprocessor program
(PREPDATA) was updated for the first time.  UPDATE #1 was
implemented on 1200 UTC 08 October 1998.  Except where noted, the
changes below affect all three versions, 3DVAR, OI, and SSI.

*********************  U P D A T E   # 1  ***********************

I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     1) The code has been made both Y2K and FORTRAN 90 compliant. 
In addition, it will port to the SGI-HA machines and provide the
same answers down to machine floating point differences.

     2) Replaced call to IW3GAD with IW3UNP29 which returns a
Y2K-compliant pseudo-ON85 header label for true ON29/124 data
sets (in this case applies only to SPSSMI file, the only input
file that is still in true ON29 format). [MAIN, UNPREP]
 
     3) This new version includes an updated form of the old
PREVENTS program, now merged in as a subroutine.  The combined
PREPDATA/PREVENTS processing is significantly faster than running
them as individual programs.  Subroutine PREVENTS is called by
subroutine W3FIZZ. [MAIN, W3FIZZ, PREVENTS]

     4) New namelist switch PREVEN to control PREVENTS processing
(=T - process PREVENTS; =F - do not process PREVENTS). [MAIN] 

     5) Data cards contain new Namelist PREVDATA which contains
switches specific to PREVENTS processing. [MAIN, PREVENTS]
          a) DOVTMP - controls PREPBUFR processing of virtual
temperature event for surface land and marine reports (=T -
encode virtual temperature; =F - retain sensible temperature).
          b) DOFCST - controls PREPBUFR encoding of forecast
(guess) background (=T - encode background; =F - do not encode
background).
          c) DOBERR - controls PREPBUFR processing of
observational error (=T - encode obs. error; =F - do not encode
obs. error).

(NOTE: DOFCST and DOBERR are new; DOVTMP was in old PREVENTS
program, although the meaning was slightly different.)

     
     6) The arrangement of the input data set unit numbers,
controlled by switch IUNIT in Namelist PARM has been changed.
[MAIN]

     7) If PREVENTS, processing selected, PREVENTS now outputs a
data filtering events summary to a file in text format. [MAIN,
PREVENTS]

     8) Removed the following obsolete PREPBUFR Table B mnemonics
from the prep.bufrtable file: RHO, RHQ, RHF, RHE, RHP, RHR.
[MAIN, W3FIZZ]

     9) Removed the following obsolete PREPBUFR Table A entry
from the prep.bufrtable file: SFCBOG. [MAIN, W3FIZZ]

     10) Subr. W3FIZZ streamlined to no longer separate single-
level and multi-level Table A entry types in PREPBUFR encoding.
[MAIN, W3FIZZ]

     11) Report headers moved out of NOBS array into new HDR
array.  HDR array stores Latitude [HDR(1)] in whole degrees (with
decimal precision to 100'th, N+, S-), Longitude [HDR(2)] in whole
degrees (with decimal precision to 100'th, EAST), Obs. time
[HDR(4)] in whole hours (with decimal precision to 1000'th), and
Receipt time [HDR(11)] in whole hours (with decimal precision to
100'th).  This streamlines to interface between the BUFR data
dumps and the PREPBUFR file. [MAIN, IW3UNPBF, W3ERSUNB, W3UNPKB7]

    12) Report level data moved out of NOBS array (NOBS array
removed) and into new 3-dimensional MOBS array.  Dimension 1 is
either: 1-obs, 2-PREPBUFR q.m., 3-reason code; Dimension 2 is the
variable (see PREPDATA Docblock); Dimension 3 is the level. 
Streamlines the interface between the BUFR data dumps and the
PREPBUFR file.  Removes the packing and unpacking of the "quality
marker word". [MAIN]

    13) Streamlined the processing of flight-level reccos = all
three types: 1) Category 6 only; 2) Category 6 with reported
mandatory level geopotential; 3) Category 6 with reported mean
sea-level pressure. [MAIN, IW3UNPBF, PREP, GETC06, SFCDTA]
          a) OPERATIONAL CHANGE: Corrected problem that the
reported geopotential heights weren't getting a SUSPECT flag.
          b) OPERATIONAL CHANGE: Corrected problem that type 3)
in 13) above were not setting the PMSL height level (elev) to
zero in cases when no wind data were available (for both
dropwinsondes and splash-level reports).  What had been happening
in this case was the PMSL height was set to that of the flight-
level and the flight-level height was set to missing.

  
    14) Removed all logic pertaining to TOVS processing. [MAIN,
SATEDS, SNDPRP, SATBFR]

    15) Internal subroutines TOVSID and TDEW no longer called and
removed (TOVS processing removed). [MAIN]

    16) W3LIB routines W3TOVUNP and W3TOVEDS no longer called
(TOVS processing removed). [MAIN]

    17) Namelist switch RTOVS removed since RTOVS is only option
(TOVS processing removed). [MAIN]

    18) All references to "partly-cloudy" TOVS retrieval path,
including report types 162 and 172, removed (TOVS processing
removed, RTOVS can't have a partly cloudy path). [MAIN]

    19) With demise of TOVS, subr. W3CNVTOV modified to process
only RTOVS data (i.e., no partly-cloudy path possible, only
essential dat in input unpacked NMCEDS format). Also, only writes
out Category 1 in IW3UNPBF format since this is all that is
processed in PREPDATA. [W3CNVTOV]

    20) With demise of TOVS, subr. W3TOVMND (renamed from W3FA07
to avoid confusion with existing W3LIB routine) modified to
process only RTOVS data (i.e.,. no trop data processed).
[W3TOVMND]

    21) Subr. W3RTVEDS modified to call W3FI04 first time in to
obtain machine word length, rather that hardwiring it to 8 bytes
as before (used in XMOVEX subroutine). [W3RTVEDS]

    22) Now processes "solar and infrared radiation correction
indicator" (BUFR Code Table 0-02-013) for rawinsonde reports with
a valid instrument type.  Read from unpacked iw3unp29 format
Category 8, code figure 353.  Encoded into PREPBUFR file under
mnemonic SIRC. [MAIN, RPTLBL, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01]

    23) For processing RTOVS data subsampled at 250 km (namelist
switch TR80KM=FALSE), the returned Filter Flag from NESDIS is now
set to 0 for good and 1 for redundant retrievals (a fix by NESDIS
several months ago).  Code was modified to key on this to
subsample at 250 km rather than returning every fourth retrieval
to estimate 250 km subsampling as was done before. [MAIN,
W3RTVEDS, SATEDS, SATBFR] 