                                              February 18, 1998

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- W/NP22
Subject:        Changes to 3DVAR/OI/SSI-Data Preprocessor
                (February 17, 1998 Version -- UPDATE # 1)

The February 17, 1998 version of the data preprocessor program
(PREPDATA) was updated for the first time.  UPDATE #1 was
implemented on 1200 UTC 11 March 1998.  Except where noted, the
changes below affect all three versions, 3DVAR, OI, and SSI.

*********************  U P D A T E   # 1  ***********************

I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     1) The major change in this program was to remove old,
obsolete logic, much of which had pertained to input in unpacked
Office Note 29 format.  This, along with other intended changes,
has allowed the program to become more computationally efficient.
For example, the cpu time to run this program has been reduced by
approximately 36% in both the 00Z FNL network (9.2 minutes to 5.9
minutes) and the t-12 EDAS 3DVAR network (8.6 minutes to 5.5
minutes).  In addition, the size of the source code has been
greatly reduced in both line count (19.5%) and in byte count
(18.3%) (including comments and docblocks).  Section II below
will summarize changes that actually affect the output PREPBUFR
file (and thus operations), while this Section and Section III.
will summarize changes that were part of this code streamlining
effort.

     2) The following namelist switches are no longer needed and
have been removed: SI2, UPABOG, IDELEV, IPRFTP, IVADTP, RBPWAT,
ITVMST, PMONLY, MBOGUS, BWINDO, REANL, PGAFUS, IEDSTP, DMSP,
PSFCL1, WNDADJ.

     3) The following namelist switches have been changed:  KTOP,
LEVPM, LEVST, LEVQQ.  This is because the inclusion of 925 mb as
a mandatory level means values 3 and up now pertain to the level
just beneath what they had pertained to.  As a result, the
default values, as well as the values in the data cards, have all
been increased by 1 to pertain to the same mandatory level as
before.

     4) The following in-line subroutine subprograms are no
longer called and have been removed: HGTBOG, VRTPS, FIZZ02,
BASLIN, MSTBOG, CFW, ISPMRK, W3FS22 (same as W3LIB version).  The
following in-line function subprograms are no longer called and
have been removed: PWCLC, MARK, MARKN, MARKP, I6MARK, ISFMRK.


     5) The following W3LIB routines are no longer called:
W3FI43, W3FI77, W3AI38, W3AI39, W3FI42, W3FI02, W3FI03, IW3DAT,
W3FQ02, W3FS03 
 
     6) The following W3LIB routines have been replaced with in-
line routines that may eventually become W3LIB routines except
where noted (these are linked into PREPDATA.f separately in the
makefile script):

          a. IW3GAD - replaced with IW3UNPBF (returns a report
from one of the "traditional" ON29 file types, now of course in
BUFR, in a revised and streamlined unpacked format. (NOTE: IW3GAD
still called for SSM-I data types).  This change has resulted in
changes to PREPDATA subroutines PREP, GETUPA, GETC06, SNDPRP in
order to handle the new unpacked IW3UNPBF format.  Here are
highlights of the changes between unpacked ON29 format and
unpacked IW3UNPBF format:
          - First call no longer returns a 32-byte character
string that looks like ON85. Instead, data set name, center date,
and dump time are returned as character words in the first 3
words of the unpacked array, respectively (affects MAIN and
subroutine UNPREPBF). [ PREPDATA date checking now simplified to
a comparison of 8-digit yymmddhh integer date in production date
vs. dump file center date (MANY).  There is no longer an option
to obtain the production date from an ADPUPA file, thus IDATA(28)
switch no longer used.] 
          - Report time in word 4 (REAL) of the header is now
stored in thousandths of an hour rather than in hundredths of an
hour. [PREPDATA no longer reads ACARS report time to this
precision from Category 8, code figure 921 (UNPREPBF).  Other
types now have more precise report times - this has operational
implications (see II. below).]
          - The meaning of the reserve characters in words 5 and
6 of the header has changed.
          - Receipt time is stored in word 11 (REAL) of header.
[PREPDATA stores it in previously unused word 3 of NOBS report
array (RPTLBL, FIZZ01).] 
          - Station ID is now stored in word 12 (CHAR*8) of
header.
          - All category quality markers and indicators,
previously grouped together as characters in a single word, are
now stored as real numbers in separate words for each variable on
a level.  The quality marker numbers have identical meaning to
those in the PREPBUFR file. [PREPDATA now reads them in directly
without the need to convert them from ON29 to PREPBUFR values
(MANY).]
          - All category wind speed words are stored as
meters/second times 10, rather than knots as before. [PREPDATA
now reads this in directly rather than from Category 8, code
figure 924 for Cat. 6 and surface types (GETC06, SFCDTA). 
PREPDATA subroutine UV now always expects wind speed in
meters/sec).  This increased wind speed precision has operational
implications (see II. below). ]
          - In Category 1, pressure in mb *10 (REAL) now stored
in word 1 for each level, while pressure quality marker now
stored in word 7 (REAL) for each level.  All other data moves
down one word.  Category 1 now includes 925 mb mandatory level
data. [PREPDATA reads pressure here rather than having an
assumed, hardwired pressure value as before (GETUPA).  The
inclusion of 925 mb as a mandatory level has operational
implications (see II. below).]
          - In Categories 2 and 3, an additional word (7 or 6,
respectively) added for each level to hold special indicator
(e.g., tropopause, maximum wind, estimated pressure, etc.).
          - In Category 6, pressure in mb *10 (REAL) (if
reported) now stored in word 1 (REAL) for each level, while
pressure quality marker now stored in word 7 (REAL) for each
level.  All other data moves down one word. [PREPDATA now reads
this pressure directly if its available, rather than calculating
it (ACARS) or obtaining it from Category 8, code figure 13
(SATWND).  If pressure is missing (AIRCFT), then PREPDATA
calculates it from pressure-altitude as before (GETC06).  This
has operational implications for ACARS data (see II. below).]
          - In Category 52, Past Weather-2 now always stored in
word 17 for each level, rather than sharing location with the
Dewpoint Depression quality marker byte. 
          - AMDAR/ASDAR aircraft "Phase of Flight" indicator is
stored in Category 8, code figure 914 [PREPDATA stores it in
previously unused word 4 of NOBS report array (RPTLBL, FIZZ01).] 
          - AMDAR/ASDAR aircraft "Temperature Precision"
indicator is stored in Category 8, code figure 915.  Before this
was stored in the header reserve character location. 
          - AIREP/PIREP and AMDAR/ASDAR aircraft "Turbulence"
indicator is stored in Category 8, code figure 916.  Before this
was stored in the Category 6 Dewpoint Depression quality marker
byte.

     b. W3UNPK77 - replaced with W3UNPKB7 (returns a VAD wind,
wind profiler, or GOES sounding report in a revised format
closely linked to that in unpacked IW3UNPBF).  Here are
highlights of the changes between unpacked reports from W3UNPK77
and W3UNPKB7:
          - Report time in word 4 (REAL) of the header is now
stored in thousandths of an hour rather than in hundredths of an
hour. [PREPDATA reports now have more precise report times - this
has operational implications (see II. below).]
          - Receipt time is stored in word 11 (REAL) of header.
[PREPDATA stores it in previously unused word 3 of NOBS report
array (FIZZ01).] 
          - Station ID is now stored in word 12 (CHAR*8) of
header.
          - Timely BUFR messages can no longer be written to an
output file.
          - Category 12 (GOES), Category 4 (VAD wind) and
Category 8 quality markers and indicators, previously grouped
together as characters in a single word, are now stored as real
numbers in separate words for each variable on a level.  The
quality marker numbers have identical meaning to those in the
PREPBUFR file. [PREPDATA now reads them in directly without the
need to convert them from ON29 to PREPBUFR values (MANY).]

     b. W3ERSUNP - replaced with W3ERSUNB (returns an ERS wind
report in a revised format closely linked to that in unpacked
IW3UNPBF).
          - Report time in word 4 (REAL) of the header is now
stored in thousandths of an hour rather than in hundredths of an
hour.  [PREPDATA reports now have more precise report times -
this has operational implications (see II. below).]
          - Receipt time is stored in word 11 (REAL) of header.
[PREPDATA stores it in previously unused word 3 of NOBS report
array (FIZZ01).] 
          - Station ID is now stored in word 12 (CHAR*8) of
header.
          
     c. W3FA07 - replaced with in-line W3FA07 (redesigned to
input unpacked NMCEDS format for a report as full integer words
rather than as packed 16-bit words.  This change resulted in
changes in subroutine SATEDS.

     7) The following in-line subroutine subprograms have been
added:
          UNPREPBF - called for report types that read in a
report in the new IW3UNPBF unpacked format (see 6 above).  Note:
entry CHKREP was moved from subroutine UNPREP ro UNPREPBF.
          W3CNVTOV - converts unpacked TOVS NMCEDS format, after
W3FA07 calculates temp and height on mandatory levels, to
unpacked IW3UNPBF format prior to SNDPRP/GETUPA processing.  This
change resulted in changes to subroutines SATEDS and SNDPRP in
order to handle the new unpacked IW3UNPBF (via W3CNVTOV) format.

     8) The following W3LIB routines are now called:
          - W3FA04 to generate pressure at reported height levels
via U.S. Standard Atmosphere when no spanning level pressure data
are available.

     9) The "keys" explaining which report types are operational
in which systems, etc. (printed at end of stdout) have been
modified.

     10) Stop with condition code 69 (overflow packing fullword
array to 16-bit array) can no longer occur (SATEDS).

     11) PREPBUFR table values are now the same as the quality
markers found in the PREPBUFR file (0->0, hold; 1-4->1, good; 5-
7->2, neutral; 8-9->3, suspect; 10-15 no change, bad) (MANY).

     12) Removed tests for "old" processing (i.e., before a
certain date logic was different).  Only runs for "current"
processing logic (MANY).

          

II. OPERATIONAL CHANGES

     A. CHANGES IN ALL DATA TYPE PROCESSING EXCEPT ACARS

          1. The change to report time to nearest 1000'th of an
hour in word 4 of the unpacked report format (rather than to the
nearest 100'th of an hour as before) will give more precision to
the report time encoded as DHR in the PREPBUFR file.  This is
especially true for GOES soundings which report to the nearest
second.  ACARS reports already had this precision since report
times to the nearest 1000'th of an hour had been read from
Category 8.  This may change the number of reports excluded due
to being outside the selected time window, especially for GOES
soundings.
 
     B. CHANGES IN UPPER-AIR DATA PROCESSING:

          1. Since the test for all mandatory levels flagged has
been removed, such that significant level flagging is now based
strictly on SDMEDIT values for those levels rather than on all
mandatory levels being flagged, the quality markers placed on the
925 mb level data are now correct (GETUPA).

          2. Added logic to flag surface height (elevation) as
bad if all mandatory level heights have been purged (both in cat
2/3 processing and in cat. 4 processing) (GETUPA).

          3. Since the 925 mb level can now be recognized as
either a mandatory level or a significant level (or both),
reports with a surface level of exactly 925 mb now properly
record the first cat. 2/3 level as 925 mb. Before, the surface
level was always missing in this case since 925 mb data could
only be recognized as a mandatory level.

          4. SSI/R3DVAR only: Namelist switch SPCIAL redefined
such that when FALSE, PREPDATA will no longer generate special
levels just to aid in the generation of Category 4 pressures
(after which the special levels were excluded from output to the
PREPBUFR file) (GETUPA, SMERGE).  As a result of this change ...
               
               a. When SPCIAL=F,...
                    I.  reports with no valid height levels
[e.g., only Category 4 levels (Profiler, VAD winds, PIBALS) or
only Cat 3 and 4 levels (PIBALS)] generate pressures on all
reported Category 4 winds-by-height levels, not just on Category
4 levels with heights between spanning 1000 and 10 mb heights, as
before when the special levels bounded between these levels were
used.  This can increase the number of Category 4 levels
processed for a report, especially at calculated pressure levels
above 10 mb.  [WNDBYZ]
                    ii. reports with valid height levels also can
have an increased number of Category 4 levels processed since all
Cat. 4 levels above the last valid height level (and even above
10 mb) can still calculate pressure, but here via U.S. Standard
Atmosphere from the reported height.  This may cause some
differences in pressure from before for those Cat. 4 levels above
last reported height level but below 10 mb.  (A sanity check in
this case will prevent calculated pressures from being .GE.
pressure on level immediately below.)  [WNDBYZ]
               b. All Cat. 4 pressures calculated strictly via
U.S. Standard Atmosphere from the reported height now get a
reason code of 116 rather than 103 as before (such levels still
get reason code of 103 if pressure is calculated via hydrostatic
integration from spanning valid pressure/height levels).  [WNDBYZ]

          5. The change in Category 1-5 wind speed to the nearest
10'th of a meter/second (rather than knots as before) will give
more precision to u- and v-component winds encoded as UOB and VOB
in the PREPBUFR file.

          6. All Category 5 (tropopause) levels that have a
reported wind speed of ZERO are flagged as bad (15) so the
analysis will not assimilate these erroneous (most certainly)
reports (GETUPA).
      
     C. CHANGES IN ACARS AIRCRAFT DATA PROCESSING:

          1. The change in Category 6 to store reported pressure
in word 1 allows ACARS data (which report pressure) to use this
value directly, rather than calculating it from the reported
pressure-altitude, as before.  This can lead to a maximum 1 mb
difference in the pressure encoded as POB in the PREPBUFR file
(most reports show an unchanged POB value).

     D. CHANGES IN SSM/I DATA PROCESSING:

          1. RDAS/RGL only (not MESO-ETA OI): This version of
PREPDATA will no longer process SSM/I TPW (never processed SSM/I
wind speed) since the RDAS/RGL OI-analysis does not assimilate
these data.  [DATACARDS]

 



III. NON-OPERATIONAL CHANGES

     A. CHANGES IN WIND PROFILER DATA PROCESSING:
          
          1. The printout to stdout of decoded reports has been
removed (PREP).
          2. Unused logic pertaining to the rewriting of timely
BUFR messages has been removed (PREP).

     B. CHANGES IN VAD WIND DATA PROCESSING:

          1. The printout to stdout of decoded reports has been
removed (PREP). 
               2. Unused logic pertaining to the rewriting of timely
BUFR messages has been removed (PREP).

     C. CHANGES IN ERS DATA PROCESSING (SSI only):

          1. The printout to stdout of decoded reports has been
removed (GETERS).

     D. CHANGES IN UPPER-AIR BOGUS DATA PROCESSING:

          1. All logic for this obsolete data type has been
removed (PREP).  Report type 110 is now empty.

     E. CHANGES IN UPPER-AIR DATA PROCESSING:

          1. Processing of special sigma levels removed (never
invoked operationally) (GETUPA).
          2. Extra logic pertaining to the processing of the 925
mb mandatory level from unpacked ON29 format removed (GETUPA).
          3. Logic pertaining to the baseline checking was
removed (no longer invoked) (GETUPA).
          4. Logic pertaining to RAOB precipitable water
calculation and processing was removed (no longer invoked and
wasn't even set-up to encode into PREPBUFR file) (GETUPA, SMERGE,
PWATER).  Report type 151 is now empty.
          5. Logic used to generate reports with special
(auxiliary) levels only was removed (never invoked) (STOROB).
          6. Radiosonde instrument type is no longer obtained
from Cat. 8, code figure 106.  The value read in word 8 of the
unpacked header is always correct (RPTLBL).
          7. Logic that tested for all mandatory levels in a
report having a purge or keep flag and applying that same flag
then to significant levels in the same report was removed
(GETUPA).  (SDMEDIT designed to place purge or keep flags on
significant, as well as mandatory, levels).


     F. CHANGES IN GOES SOUNDING PROCESSING:

               1. Unused logic pertaining to the rewriting of timely
BUFR messages has been removed (GOESDG).

     G. CHANGES IN TOVS SOUNDING PROCESSING:

          1. Logic pertaining to precipitable water calculation
and processing was removed (no longer invoked and wasn't even
set-up to encode into PREPBUFR file) (GETUPA, SATEDS, PWATER). 
Report type 153 is now empty.
          2. Unused logic pertaining to the processing of TOVS
data in unpacked NMCEDS format, where the input file is NOT a
BUFR data dump removed (this logic expected TOVS data to be in
either an NMCEDS file or in an ON29 file) (SATEDS).

     H. CHANGES IN SATELLITE MOISTURE BUGUS DATA PROCESSING:

          1. All logic for this obsolete data type has been
removed (PREP).  Report type 150 is now empty.

     I. CHANGES IN AIRCRAFT DATA PROCESSING:

          1. Logic pertaining to the tossing or flagging of
conventional AIREP/PIREP reports over the CONUS region removed
(no longer invoked, this function moved to program PREPACQC)
(GETC06).

     J. CHANGES IN PROCESSING OF DMSP SOUNDINGS:
     
          1. All logic for this obsolete data type (expected from
file in NMCEDS format) removed (SATEDS).  Report types 169/179
are now empty.

     K. CHANGES IN PROCESSING OF SURFACE DATA:

          1. Logic pertaining to the adjustment of moored buoy
wind speed to an altitude of 10 meters removed (no longer
invoked) (SFCDTA).

