                                               January 25, 1999

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to 3DVAR/OI/SSI-Data Preprocessor
                (September 21, 1998 Version -- UPDATE # 4)

The September 21, 1998 version of the data preprocessor program
(PREPDATA) was updated for the fourth time.  UPDATE #4 was
implemented on 1200 UTC 25 January 1999.  Except where noted, the
changes below affect all three versions, 3DVAR, OI, and SSI.

*********************  U P D A T E   # 4  ***********************

I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     1) Incorporated all of Bob Kistler's changes needed to port
the code to the IBM-SP. [MAIN]

     2) Added new namelist switches IVADFL and IVADSP to select
tolerance limits for VAD wind RMS vector error (defaults to
IVADFL=5 and IVADSP=2). [MAIN, GETUPA]

     3) Replaced namelist switch SATLND with two new switches
ISATLS and JSATLS (both defaults to 30*2, 20*9999, 10*2).  These
switches allow for the selection of satellite
sounding/retrieval/radiance data over both land and ocean, over
just land, or over just ocean (the previous switch SATLND was a
logical that, when set to FALSE, would only allow for data just
over ocean, or when set to TRUE, would allow for data over land
and ocean).  The two switches separate GOES layer PW retrievals
(JSATLS) from all other sounding/retrieval/radiance types
(ISATLS).  This allows GOES radiances to be used differently
(e.g., over just ocean) than GOES layer PW retrievals (e.g., over
just land). [MAIN, SATEDS, SNDTBL, SATBFR, GOESND]

     4) Namelist switches RECCON and RWINDO now apply EXCLUSIVELY
to reconnaissance aircraft reports.  Dropwinsonde data are now
covered with the corresponding new namelist switches DROPSN and
DWINDO (defaults are DROPSN=TRUE and DWINDO=300.). [MAIN, PREP]

     5) Added new namelist switch FLDMAF (default is TRUE) which
will flag moisture on all levels of USAF dropwinsonde reports
just as existing switch FLDMGS does for NOAA Gulf Stream
dropwinsondes. [MAIN, FIZZ01]  





II.  OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE

   A.  CHANGES TO UPPER-AIR DROPWINSONDE DATA PROCESSING

     1) Switch FLDMAF is set to TRUE in all networks.  USAF drops
will now have moisture flagged on all levels. [DATACARDS]

   B.  CHANGES TO VAD WIND DATA PROCESSING

     1) Switch VADWND set back to TRUE with IVADFL=1 and
IVADSP=1.  VAD winds will again be processed into the PREPBUFR
files, however winds are flagged with q.m.=13 on all levels
meaning these data will NOT be assimilated by any analyses (they
are still considered BAD). [DATACARDS]