                                              November 15, 1999

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to IBM-SP Data Preprocessor (PREPDATA)
                (September 21, 1998 Version -- UPDATE # 5)

The data preprocessor program (PREPDATA) was implemented on the
new IBM-SP machine at 12Z on September 27, 1999.  The source code
evolved from the version that had existed on the CRAY (September
21, 1998 version, update Number 4).  This memo describes the
changes made to the CRAY version.  This version is considered to
be the fifth update (for the IBM-SP ONLY) to the September 21,
1999 version.  Except where noted, the changes below affect all
three versions: 3DVAR, SSI and RUC.

**************** I B M - S P   U P D A T E   # 5  ***************

I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     
     1) Numerous small source code changes necessary to port the
program from the Cray (64-bit machine) to the IBM (32-bit and 64-
bit machine). [MAIN]

     2) The "PREVENTS" function (which prior to this was a
separate PREVENTS program running subsequent to this program) is
now performed by PREPDATA via a call to a new W3LIB routine
GBLEVENTS.  This is more efficient than the method. [MAIN,
W3FIZZ]

     3) Removed subroutine W3ERSUNP and the call to it.  This was
needed on the Cray because the input reprocessed ERS data dump
file was in WMO BUFR format.  This file on the IBM is in NCEP
BUFR format and is read in via subroutine W3UNPK07 (see I.4).
[MAIN, GETERS]

     4) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to handle the
reprocessed ERS data dump file now in NCEP BUFR format. [MAIN,
GETERS,W3UNPKB7]

     5) Removed subroutine UNPREP and the call to it. Also
removed call to W3LIB routine IW3UNP29. All of this was needed on
the Cray because the input reprocessed SSM/I data dump file was
in ON29 format.  This file on the IBM is in NCEP BUFR format and
is read in via subroutine IW3UNPBF (see I.6).  [MAIN, GETSMI]

     6) Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to handle the
reprocessed SSM/I data dump file now in NCEP BUFR format. [MAIN,
UNPREPBF, GETSMI, IW3UNPBF]

     7) The "Tableb" and "Tabled" files are no longer input into
to this program since the reprocessed ERS data dump file is now
NCEP BUFR rather than WMO BUFR (see I.2). [MAIN, GETERS] 

     8) Removed the following unused mnemonics from each report's
header in the PREPBUFR file: RQM, DUP, PRG, SRC, RUC.  These were
once used for reanalysis on the Cray but in the productions runs
they were always set to missing and were wasting a lot of space
in the PREPBUFR file. [MAIN, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, bufrtable]

     9) Modified the definition of the third element in the
namelist switches SWINDO, SWNLND, JSWIND, and JSMASS such that
the value of 1 now refers only to conventional IR cloud drift
(had referred to both conventional IR and conventional visible
cloud drift) and the value of 3 now refers to conventional
visible cloud drift (had referred to now-obsolete gradient
winds).  There currently apply only to foreign satellite wind
products. [MAIN, GETC06]

     10) Added new definitions for report types 250 (now Japanese
GMS water vapor satwinds), 254 (now EUMETSAT water vapor
satwinds) and 256 (now INSAT water vapor satwinds). The first two
types are now being decoded and the IBM version of the dump
script will dump them as part of the "satwnd" dump.   [MAIN,
GETC06]

     11) Replaced in-line sort subroutine SHELL and call to it
with call to W3LIB routine ORDERS.  Subroutine ORDERS is not only
a more efficient sort routine, but it allows for multiple sort
keys which ensures that the sort will produce the same ordering
regardless of the order of the input data that is being sorted.
[MAIN, SMERGE, WNDBYP, WNDBYZ] 

     12) Replaced call to W3LIB routine W3FI04 with call to new
in-line subroutine WORDLENGTH to determine REAL and INTEGER
machine wordlength in order to pass proper sort key into W3LIB
routine ORDERS. (W3LIB routine W3FI04 only returned INTEGER
machine word length - IBM allows REAL and INTEGER word length to
differ.)  [MAIN, IW3UNPBF]

     13) Stop condition code 22 was removed because it could
never occur. [MAIN]

     14) A return code of 4 will now occur when no reports from
either the input "adpupa" dump or "adpsfc" dump are actually
written into the PREPBUFR file.  In this situation, one or both
of these files may actually contain reports but these reports are
skipped in the PREPBUFR processing.  Prior to this, this return
code could occur only when one of these input dump files were
actually empty. [MAIN, PREP, SFCDTA]

     15) Added two new Table D entries in the program codes list: 
CQCVAD with a program code of 012, and R3DVAR with a program code
of 013. [bufrtable]
     
     17) Namelist switch PREVEN moved from namelist "LDTA" to new
namelist "GBLEVN".  If the namelist "GBLEVN" is not found in the
data cards, then PREVEN defaults to FALSE.  This allows the call
to W3LIB routine GBLEVENTS to be controlled at the script level. 
For example, in the RUC version at those times not divisible by
3, the make_prepbufr script will NOT append namelist "GBLEVN" to
the beginning of the data card parm file. [MAIN]     



II. OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE

  
  A. CHANGES TO SATELLITE WIND DATA PROCESSING

     1) GMS water vapor satwinds (report type 250), EUMETSAT
water vapor satwinds (report type 254) and INSAT water vapor
satwinds (report type 256) can now be processed.  Only the first
two are currently available.  In the SSI version, all types will
be processed if found, but they will be flagged for non-use by
the analysis. In the 3DVAR version, the first two types will be
processed if found but they will be flagged for non-use by the
analysis. [MAIN, GETC06, IW3UNPBF]

     2) The report id for all foreign satwind types is now
reprocessed in the same way as for the GOES satwind types.  In
particular, even vs. odd METEOSAT and GMS satellites now get
unique identifying character in position 1 of the id.  They also
get a unique character in position 6 of the id based on the
product type (IR, visible or water vapor). [IW3UNPBF]


  B. CHANGES TO AIRCRAFT DATA PROCESSING  

     1) The following variables are now encoded into the PREPBUFR
file under unique mnemonic names: Aircraft Phase of Flight
(mnemonic POAF), all aircraft types; Aircraft Degree of
Turbulence (mnemonic DGOT), for non-ACARS aircraft types. [MAIN,
FILLX, GETC06, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, bufrtable]

     2) Added processing of ACARS moisture data into PREPBUFR
file (as specific humidity), if available. [Currently only a few
flights report mixing ratio.] Reported mixing ratio is converted
to dewpoint depression and then to specific humidity.  Currently,
all ACARS moisture observations are given a quality mark of 15 so
they will not be used by any analysis. [Note: a virtual
temperature will not be calculated in GBLEVENTS since the
moisture obs. is bad.] [MAIN, GETC06, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, PREVENTS,
IW3UNPBF]


 


 C. CHANGES TO SURFACE DATA PROCESSING


     1) Updated logic to properly process Australian sea-level
pressure bogus (PAOB) data.  This type currently not processed
(except in CDAS version). [MAIN, SFCDTA, ISSEL]


  D.  CHANGES TO UPPER-AIR (RAOB, PIBAL, PROFILER, VADWND) DATA   
      PROCESSING
     
     1) For RAOBS and PIBALS only: All input tropopause levels
are processed into the PREPBUFR file with a singular category of
5.  Prior to this, tropopause levels were processed as both
category 3 and 5 (like the old Office Note 29).  This change will
allow users of the PREPBUFR file to better define the tropopause
levels. [IW3UNPBF]

     2) For RAOBS and PIBALS only: All mandatory levels
containing only wind information (no mass data) are now processed
into the PREPBUFR file with a category of 1.  Prior to this,
these levels were processed as category 3 (like the old Office
Note 29). [IW3UNPBF]

     3) For RAOBS only: Removed the special truncation of U.S.
RAOBS wind-by-height heights above the 100 mb level.  (Heights
above 100 mb were truncated down to next 10 meter level like the
old ON29 convention.) [IW3UNPBF]   

     4) For RAOBS and PIBALS only: All variables on duplicate
pressure levels (for category 2 and 3) or on duplicate height
levels (for category 4) [as read in from the report in the BUFR
data dump] are now flagged with a quality mark of 14 when one or
more of the non-vertical coordinate data are different.  Prior to
this, both levels were processed into the PREPBUFR file.  The
idea is that if the two levels disagree it is better to throw
them both out than to retain any bad data. [IW3UNPBF]

     5) For RAOBS only: The radiosonde balloon drift lat/lon is
now calculated on every level and encoded into the PREPBUFR file
with mnemonics XDR and YDR.  These are not yet used by any
analyses. [MAIN, STOROB, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, bufrtable]












     6) For VAD wind and Wind Profiler only in 3DVAR version
only: The time window for processing either data type (in the
namelist) is strictly honored.  If no data are found in the time
window specified, then no data are processed into the PREPBUFR
file.  Prior to this, if only a single hour was specified in the
time window switch for either VAD wind or wind profiler data, and
if no data were found at that time, the code would do the
following: 1) step back 1-hour from the original time and check
for data then; 2) if data found, this data would be processed
into PREPBUFR file; 3) if no data found, code would step up 1-
hour from the original time and check for data then; 4) if data
found, this data would be processed into PREPBUFR file; 5) if no
data found, then no data would be processed into PREPBUFR file. 
The old logic was written in an attempt to always provide data to
the OI-RGL and OI-ETA runs which could not handle data from the
same report at two different times. It had been left over in the
3DVAR version on the Cray for wind profiler processing.  The
3DVAR data cards have been changed to process wind profiler data
over three hours (1-hour before analysis hour, analysis hour, and
1-hour after analysis hour) rather than over just a single hour.
[MAIN, PREP]