                                             September 22, 2000

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to IBM-SP Data Preprocessor (PREPDATA)
                (February 17, 2000 Version -- UPDATE # 2)

The February 17, 2000 data preprocessor program (PREPDATA) was
updated for the second time.  UPDATE#2 was implemented on the
IBM-SP machine at 12Z on October 4, 2000.  Except where noted,
the changes below affect all five versions: ETA, AVN, FNL, RUC
and CDAS.

**************** I B M - S P   U P D A T E   # 2  ***************

I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     1) Subroutine GETERS changed to GETSCATT since it process
both ERS and new QUIKSCAT scatterometer wind reports. [MAIN,
GETSCATT]

     2) Added the new namelist switch JPQKSD, a 6-word array
which controls the processing (=0 - YES, =9999 - NO) of QUIKSCAT
scatterometer wind data in 6 latitude bands.  The default is
JPQKSD=/6*9999/ . [MAIN, CARDS]

     3) Added the new namelist switch IQWNDO, a 2-word array
which provides the earliest and latest times for accepting
QUIKSCAT scatterometer wind reports.  The default is
IQWNDO=/-3,3/ . [MAIN, CARDS]

     4) Added the new namelist switch IQKSLM which indicates the
probability of rain threshold (in percent) for processing
QUIKSCAT scatterometer wind reports.  The default is IQKSLM=/101/
(all reports are accepted). [MAIN, CARDS]

     5) Added the new namelist switch IQKSSP, a 2-word array
which indicates the upper (word 1) and lower (word 2) cross-track
cell number limits for which QUIKSCAT scatterometer winds will
receive a quality mark of 3 (suspect).  All reports with cross-
track cell number > IQKSSP(1) and < IQKSSP(2) recive a quality
mark of 2 (neutral).  The default is IQKSSP=/8,64/. [MAIN, CARDS]

     6) Added the new logical namelist switch APPEND which when
TRUE assumes that new data is to be appended to an existing
PREPBUFR file in unit ??.  In this case, the internal BUFR
mnemonic table in the existing PREPBUFR file is used, rather than
the external table in unit ??.  When APPEND=FALSE, a new PREPBUFR
file is generated from the external PREPBUFR mnemonic table, as
before.  The default is APPEND=FALSE. [MAIN, W3FIZZ, CARDS]

     7) Added call to BUFRLIB routine DATEBF when namelist switch
APPEND=TRUE to get date from existing PREPBUFR file in unit ??. 
This date is checked against the expected (production) date.
[MAIN, W3FIZZ]

     8) New condition code 30 added for case when APPEND=TRUE and
the date from the existing PREPBUFR file does not match the
expected (production) date. [MAIN, W3FIZZ]

     9) Condition code 04 (either no ADPUPA data types or no
ADPSFC data types or none of either type) cannot occur when
APPEND=TRUE. [MAIN]

     10) Namelist switches FWINDO, JSURFM and JSURFW expanded
from 8 to 9 words, where word 9 point to new surface marine type
"Automated Tide Gauge Statons" (see II.A.1 below).  The defaults
are FINDO(9)=300., JSURFM(9)=0, JSURFW(9)=0. [MAIN, SFCDTA,
CARDS]

     11) The W3LIB routine GBLEVENTS (which is called by
PREPOBS_PREPDATA when the namelist switch PREVEN=TRUE) was
modified to add a new switch QTOP_REJ to the namelist &PREVDTA
which it reads in.  This new switch indicates the pressure level
(in mb) above which all specific humidity quality markers are
"rejected" (set to 9) in GBLEVENTS.  Prior to this, this level
had been hardwired to 300 mb.  The default is QTOP_REJ=300. . 
The compilation of PREPOBS_PREPDATA will link in this updated
W3LIB routine.  Currently, the default value for QTOP_REJ is used
in all networks, so there is no change in production. [GBLEVENTS]

     12) Removed obsolete logic dealing with the old OI
processing. {MAIN]

     13) Changed default for namelist switches FILLZ, FILLT,
FILLW and FILLM from TRUE TO FALSE.  Changed default for namelist
switch IRNMRK FROM 2 TO -99.  Namelist switch IRNMRK=2 is now
defined as the NCEP Model Run Marker for the special afos
graphics run in Job AFPLT.  [MAIN]












II. OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE


  A. CHANGES TO SURFACE DATA PROCESSING

     1) Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to recognize surface
marine automated tide gauge reports (BUFR type 001, subtype 005),
which are soon to be added to the "sfcshp" data dump group. 
These will be given an ON29 report type (T29) of 533. Once these
are added they will be encoded into the PREPBUFR file. [MAIN,
IW3UNPBF, SFCDTA, ISSEL]


  B. CHANGES TO GOES SATELLITE SOUNDING/RADIANCE DATA PROCESSING

     1) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to bypass time window
checking on BUFR messages if the input time window values (IHE)
and (IHL) are -6 AND +6 hours, respectively. In this case, it is
assumed that all BUFR messages in the file are to be processed
regardless of their Section 1 time stamp.  This change will
improve the efficiency of this program in AVN, FNL and CDAS
network runs.  [W3UNPKB7]


  C. CHANGES TO SATELLITE WIND DATA PROCESSING

     1) Subroutine IW3UNPBF was further modified (from the
original modifications in the previous implementation) to
properly decode and process the new, expanded format for NESDIS
satellite winds from both GOES and GMS satellites.  This format
is now operational. [IW3UNPBF].

     2) Changes to account for new BUFR types and subtypes
representing NESDIS satellite winds.  Type 005, subtype 014
replaces obsolete type 005, subtype 007 in SUBSKP checks for
NESDIS/GOES water vapor sounder winds.  Type 005, subtype 013
added to SUBSKP checks for NESDIS/GOES picture triplet winds. 
Also in the print for time windows, 005/010 replaces 005/005
(NESDIS/GOES IR), 005/011 replaces 005/006 (NESDIS/GOES water
vapor imager), 005/014 replaces 005/007 (NESDIS/GOES water vapor
sounder), 005/012 replaces 005/008 (NESDIS/GOES visible), and
005/013 replaces 005/009 (NESDIS/GOES picture triplet). [MAIN,
PREP]
 






  D. CHANGES TO WIND PROFILER DATA PROCESSING  

     1) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to store the rainfall
rate (W3UNPKB7 Category 10) in units of mm/hour.  Prior to this
it was stored in units of 10**7 mm/sec (where it had been
incorrectly documented to be in units of 10**7 m/sec).  Since
rainfall rate for wind profiler reports is not encoded into the
PREPBUFR file, this change has no effect on production. 
[W3UNPKB7]

     2) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to bypass time window
checking on BUFR messages if the input time window values (IHE)
and (IHL) are -6 AND +6 hours, respectively. In this case, it is
assumed that all BUFR messages in the file are to be processed
regardless of their Section 1 time stamp.  This change will
improve the efficiency of this program in AVN, FNL and CDAS
network runs.  [W3UNPKB7]

 
  E. CHANGES TO VAD WIND DATA PROCESSING  

     1) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to bypass time window
checking on BUFR messages if the input time window values (IHE)
and (IHL) are -6 AND +6 hours, respectively. In this case, it is
assumed that all BUFR messages in the file are to be processed
regardless of their Section 1 time stamp.  This change will
improve the efficiency of this program in AVN, FNL and CDAS
network runs.  [W3UNPKB7]


  F. CHANGES TO ERS SCATTEROMETER WIND DATA PROCESSING  

     1) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to bypass time window
checking on BUFR messages if the input time window values (IHE)
and (IHL) are -6 AND +6 hours, respectively. In this case, it is
assumed that all BUFR messages in the file are to be processed
regardless of their Section 1 time stamp.  This change will
improve the efficiency of this program in AVN, FNL and CDAS
network runs.  [W3UNPKB7]











III. NON-OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE


  A. CHANGES TO QUIKSCAT SCATTEROMETER WIND DATA PROCESSING

     1) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to decode the new
QUIKSCAT wind scatterometer data from the reprocessed BUFR data
dump file "qkswnd".  They are given an ON29 report type (T29) of
582 and a PREPBUFR report type of 285. They are encoded into the
PREPBUFR file user the Table A Message Entry QKSWND.  In addition
to the standard header and wind information, the cross-track cell
number (CTCN), along-track row number (ATRN) and seawinds
probability of rain (SPRR) are encoded into the PREPBUFR file.  A
temporary item is the thinning of data by processing only every-
other unpacked report prior to any checking.  This will
eventually be moved to the upstream program WAVE_DCODQUIKSCAT. 
Currently, the defaults for namelist switches JPQKSD, IQWNDO,
IQKSLM and IQKSSP are used in all netorks and these data are not
processed operationally. [MAIN, FILLX, GETSCATT, W3FIZZ,
W3UNPKB7, BUFRTABLE]

     2) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to bypass time window
checking on BUFR messages if the input time window values (IHE)
and (IHL) are -6 AND +6 hours, respectively. In this case, it is
assumed that all BUFR messages in the file are to be processed
regardless of their Section 1 time stamp.  This change will
improve the efficiency of this program in AVN, FNL and CDAS
network runs.  [W3UNPKB7]