                                                 March 29, 2000

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to IBM-SP Data Preprocessor (PREPDATA)
                (February 17, 2000 Version -- UPDATE # 1)

The data preprocessor program (PREPDATA) was implemented on the
new IBM-SP machine at 12Z on March 29, 2000.  Except where noted,
the changes below affect all five versions: ETA, AVN, FNL, RUC
and CDAS.

**************** I B M - S P   U P D A T E   # 1  ***************

I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     
     1) Numerous small source code changes necessary to make the
program more machine portable (ports to the SGI107 machine).
[MAIN, IW3UNPBF, W3RTVEDS, W3RTVUNP, W3UNPKB7]

     2) When the existing data card switches are set-up to
exclude a particular BUFR type and subtype, the program now looks
for BUFR messages in the input dump files that have Table A
entries defining the BUFR type and subtype.  Such messages are
now skipped over without decoding any reports. This makes the
program more efficient than before, when reports that were not
processed into the PREPBUFR file were still decoded from the
input dump files.  (This currently applies only to upper-air and
surface data types read in via subroutine IW3UNPBF. [Historical
(CDAS) and future GOES satellite wind BUFR subtypes are accounted
for here.] [MAIN, PREP, SFCDTA, IW3UNPBF]

     3) Changes to the arrangement of sequence mnemonics in the
bufrtable have resulted in both better organization and a
reduction in the size of the PREPBUFR file (this via the removal
of the encoding of mnemonics which are always missing, especially
true in 3DVAR and RUC versions). [BUFRTABLE]

     4) The mnemonic TFC is now encoded into the PREPBUFR file
for VAD wind reports (via an earlier change to W3LIB routine
GBLEVENTS implemented 19Z 2 November 1999 which will be picked up
with this compilation).  The forecast temperature is now
interpolated to all VAD wind observation locations even though
these data do not contain temperature observations.  A future
version of the subsequent CQCVAD program will use this
information. [MAIN, BUFRTABLE]






     5) Specific humidity and virtual temperature are now
calculated as "VIRTMP" events in W3LIB routine GBLEVENTS when
specific humidity has a flagged quality mark (subject to a sanity
check) however the virtual temperature gets quality mark 8
(flagged). (This change is introduced via an earlier change to
W3LIB routine GBLEVENTS which had been implemented prior to
this.) [GBLEVENTS]
 
     6) The following subroutines which process RTOVS retrievals
have been renamed: W3RTVUNP to W3RTOVSUNP. [MAIN, SATBFR]

     7) The following subroutines which used to process only
RTOVS retrievals, but now process both RTOVS and ATOVS retrievals
have been renamed: W3CNVTOV to W3CNVXTOVS, W3RTVEDS to
W3XTOVSEDS, and W3TOVMND to W3XTOVSMND (see II.C.2 below). [MAIN,
SATEDS]

     8) A new subroutine, W3ATOVSUNP, has been added to process
ATOVS retrievals (see II.C.2 below). [MAIN, SATBFR]

     9) Namelist switches TOVEDS and TOVBFR are now 1-dimensional
arrays of length 2 to differentiate between RTOVS (=1) and new
ATOVS (=2) satellite retrievals. Currently TOVEDS(2)=.FALSE. and
TOVBFR(2)=.FALSE. - ATOVS data are not yet processed
operationally. [MAIN, SATEDS, SATBFR, CARDS]

     10) ETA ONLY: Data card switches POLEJ and XMESHL changed
from 210.00 and 2.90 to 220.00 and 3.03, respectively.  This
expands the western boundary of the data selection grid from 210
West Longitude to 220 West Longitude (the next upgrade to the Eta
model will expand the domain westward). [CARDS]

     11) Added encoding of new data into PREPBUFR file.  Mnemonic
RPT is the reported observation time in UTC (to nearest 1000'th
of an hour). Mnemonic TCOR is an indicator whether or not the
obs. time in DHR was corrected from the original value in RPT {=0
- not corrected (default); =1 - corrected based on reported
launch time (ADPUPA types only); =2 - corrected even though
launch time is missing (ADPUPA types only)}.  This is necessary
because if DHR is corrected (ADPUPA types only), RPT and TCOR
will provide information about the correction.  (See II.B.3
below.) [MAIN, RPTLBL, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, BUFRTABLE] 












II. OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE


  A. CHANGES TO SURFACE DATA PROCESSING

     1) Namelist switches FWINDO, SFMASS, and SFWIND can now
differentiate between surface land synoptic and surface land
METAR reports. [MAIN, SFCDTA, CARDS]


  B.  CHANGES TO UPPER-AIR (RAOB, PIBAL, RECCO, DROPS, PROFILER,
      VADWND) DATA PROCESSING
     
     1) In the processing of category 4 (winds-by-height) levels,
a manual (SDM) keep flag on a wind observation is now honored. 
Prior to this, all wind quality marks on category 4 levels were
set to at best (lowest) 2 (default).  This is still the case for
winds originally containing a good (1) quality marker. [MAIN,
WNDBYZ]

     2) For RAOB, PIBAL, RECCO, and DROPS data only, the reported
balloon launch time is now read from Category 8, code figure 104. 
This is used to both quality control the reported observation
time for these data (see II.B.3) and to provide a base (surface
level) time for the new RAOB/PIBAL balloon drift time calculation
(see II.B.4). [MAIN, RPTLBL]

     3) For RAOB, PIBAL, RECCO, and DROPS data only, the reported
observation time can now be "corrected" prior to its use in the
existing mnemonic DHR.  This correction is made based on either
the launch time (if reported) or the value of the observation
time itself.  See attachment for more details on the logic here.
[MAIN, RPTLBL]

     4) For RAOB and PIBAL data only, an updated balloon drift
time is now encoded on each level in the PREPBUFR file under the
mnemonic HRDR.  This is defined as balloon drift time (UTC) minus
cycle time and it is precise to the nearest 1000'th of an hour.
(The previous implementation of this program encoded balloon
drift latitude and longitude on each RAOB level under mnemonics
XDR and YDR.). See attachment for more details on this.  This is
not yet assimilated by any operational analysis. [MAIN, STOROB,
W3FIZZ, FIZZ01. BUFRTABLE]

     5) For RAOB and PIBAL data only, a number of changes have
been made to the balloon drift latitude/longitude calculation. 
First, it now includes PIBALS as well as RAOBS.  Second, there
are additional q.c. checks made in the calculation (see
attachment for more details).  Third, winds are now interpolated
to levels where previously missing (via a call to subroutine
FILWND when namelist switch FILLW is false) in order to provide
more levels on which the balloon lat/lon can be calculated (see
attachment for more details). This is not yet assimilated by any
operational analysis.  [MAIN, SMERGE, STOROB, FILWND]

     6) CDAS ONLY: For RAOB data only, the namelist switch PG4243
was changed from FALSE to TRUE.  Indian RAOB mass reports will
not be processed. [CARDS]


  C. CHANGES TO RTOVS SATELLITE DATA PROCESSING

     1) ETA, CDAS ONLY: The satellite id in ISATOB(1) returned
from subroutine W3RTOVSUNP is now the BUFR code table value (0-
01-007). [W3RTVUNP]

     2) ETA, CDAS ONLY: The seventh character of the report id
identifies report as either RTOVS (='R') or ATOVS (='A'). [NOTE:
For retrievals output in NMCEDS format (CDAS), this is a change
for RTOVS processing since this character was previously blank.]  
[MAIN, SATEDS, SATBFR, FIZZ01]

     3) CDAS ONLY: If the date of the RTOVS data dump file is
prior to 7/1/1998, then subroutines W3XTOVSEDS and W3RTOVSUNP do
not read the RTOVS Filter Flag value from the dump (mnemonic
TOFF) because it was not valid prior to this time.  Instead,
these subroutines set the filter flag value to -99.  This alerts
PREPDATA that it must simulate a 250 km sub-sampling of RTOVS
data (given namelist switch TR80KM is TRUE) by processing ONLY
every fourth retrieval it unpacks. [MAIN, W3XTOVSEDS, W3RTOVSUNP,
SATEDS, SATBFR]


  D. CHANGES TO SATELLITE WIND DATA PROCESSING

     1) Added the encoding of the NESDIS "Recursive Filter Flag"
(mnemonic RFFL) into PREPBUFR file for GOES types. [MAIN, GETC06,
W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, BUFRTABLE]

     2) Moved satellite wind quality mark assignment on all
variables (based on either "NESDIS Recursive Filter Flag" value
or on SDM manual quality control settings on one or more
variables) from subroutine IW3UNPBF to inline subroutine GETC06.
It is better for IW3UNPBF to decode quality marks just as they
are found in the BUFR data dump file. [MAIN, GETC06, IW3UNPBF]

     3) For all GOES types, subroutine IW3UNPBF now assigns the
values to the first character of the unpacked station id
(designates satellite) and to the sixth character of the id
(designates product type).  Prior to this, these values where
copied from the first and sixth characters of the station id in
the input satwnd data dump file (mnemonic RPID) which meant that
the satwnd ingest program had complete control over the values
here (and errors were possible in future updates). [IW3UNPBF]





     4) Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to handle a new,
expanded format for GOES satellite winds when it becomes
operational in the near-future (these data will have new BUFR
subtypes and additional information will be decoded from each
report). [IW3UNPBF].
 

  E. CHANGES TO WIND PROFILER DATA PROCESSING  

     1) CDAS ONLY: The namelist switch PROFIL was changed from
TRUE to FALSE.  These data will not be processed. [CARDS]
 

  F. CHANGES TO VAD WIND DATA PROCESSING  

     1) ALL BUT CDAS: The VAD winds with low RMSVE are no longer
 unilaterally flagged as bad.  The namelist switches IVADFL and
IVADSP were changed from 1,1 to 5,2 , respectively.  The
subsequent program CQCVAD was upgraded to better q.c. these data. 
They are now assimilated by the RUC, Global, and ETA analyses.
[CARDS]



III. NON-OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE


  A. CHANGES TO ATOVS SATELLITE DATA PROCESSING

     1) ATOVS satellite retrievals or radiances can now be
processed, either as 40-level/35 radiance reports (via new
subroutine W3ATOVSUNP) or as nmceds formatted reports (via
subroutine W3XTOVSEDS). The seventh character of the report id
identifies report as either RTOVS (='R') or ATOVS (='A'). [MAIN,
SATEDS, SATBFR, FIZZ01]



















ATTACHMENT:


          Details of ADPUPA Data Report Time Correction

Applies to reports in ADPUPA file (RAOBS, PIBALS, RECCOS, DROPS):

- Mnemonic DHR (obs. time minus cycle time) can now be
"corrected" based on launch time (this is why I added RPT and
TCOR - to store the original "reported" obs. time and an
indicator as to whether or not it was changed).

- Here is the logic for correcting the obs. time (to better
define the obs. time for the assimilation, at least until balloon
drift time is used by all systems) and for obtaining a launch
time (for the later balloon time drift calculation):

If reported obs. time is on the hour then:
     If the reported launch time is not missing then:
          If the launch hour is the same as the obs. hour then:
               -If the launch time minute is between 16 and 59, then the obs.
               time in DHR is corrected by adding one hour to the original
               reported value and TCOR is set to 1.  This corrects the many
               DHR=-1.0 values to DHR=0.0 for sites outside blocks 70-74.
               -If the launch time minute is between 00 and 15, then the obs.
               time in DHR is corrected by adding 30 minutes to the original
               reported value and TCOR is set to 1.  I thought about adding
               one hour here too but decided to play it conservative.
          If the launch hour is either more than 1-hour later than obs. time
          hour or more than 2-hours earlier than obs. time hour then:
               Consider launch hour invalid and set it to missing.  I'm taking
               the side of the obs. time here - I trust it more than the
               launch time, especially because the receipt times in these      
          cases seem to indicate that the obs. time is more accurate.
          End if
     End if
     If the reported launch time is missing then:
          If reported obs. time is either 1100 or 2300 UTC, and if the report
          is not in block 70-74, and if the report is a fixed land RAOB/PIBAL
          then:
               -The obs. time in DHR is corrected by adding 30 minutes to
               reported obs. time and TCOR is set to 2.  This corrects the
               many DHR=-1.0 values to DHR=-0.5 for sites outside blocks 70-74
               when no launch time is reported.  Since many mobile land RAOBS
               as well as RECCOS and DROPS report on off hours, they are not
               included in this test.  Also, since the NWS and Canadian sites
               usually set the obs. time to the hour after the launch time     
               they are not included in this test.
               -The launch time is set to 15 minutes prior to the just
               corrected obs. time.  This gives a best estimate for the launch
               time which will be used later in the balloon drift              
  calculations.
          End if
     End if
End if

After all of this, if the reported launch is still missing then:
     Set it to 15 minutes prior to the reported obs. time.  This ensures all
     reports will have a launch time for later use in the balloon drift
     calculations.
End if


- It should be noted that the time window check is done after any
possible corrections to "DHR".  This may change the number of
reports tossed by this check.



RAOB/PIBAL Balloon Drift Latitude, Longitude, & Time Calculation
                                
- The following applies to the balloon drift time calculation:
     - For RAOBS only: It is done on all levels with a
non-missing or non-bad height. This includes levels where height
was not originally reported.  Here, heights are integrated from
reported height and temperatures.  (These integrated heights are
NOT passed into the PREPBUFR file.)  This corrects a previous
error where "missing" height levels (stored with standard
atmosphere value) and bad height levels were included.  Now,
these levels are skipped and the drift time and drift lat/lon
from the level below are used.
     - For PIBALS only: It is done on all levels regardless of
the height quality mark.  Most PIBALS contain only wind-by-height
data where the height is the vertical coordinate.  Only the wind
quality mark is important here in the subsequent drift lat/lon
calculation.  For those PIBALS with both wind-by-height and
mandatory level wind (only) data, the mandatory levels are
inserted into the profile based on their standard atmosphere
height.  These standard atmosphere heights are considered valid
here.
     - On each level, it now checks for a negative drift time
difference from the time of the level below.  It also checks for
a greater than one hour drift time difference from the time of
the level below.  If either are found the level is skipped and
the drift time and drift lat/lon from the level below is used.


- The following applies to the balloon drift lat/lon calculation:
     - It is done on all levels with a non-missing or non-bad
wind.  In addition, for RAOBS, the level must also have a
non-missing or non-bad height. The height levels are as described
in the balloon time drift section above.  The wind levels include
those with interpolated wind data where no reported wind was
available.  This is a change from before when only reported wind
levels were used. This allows for a smoother vertical profile of
balloon drift lat/lon.  (These interpolated winds are NOT passed
into the PREPBUFR file.)
     - Two items regarding the wind interpolation:
          - The bracketing level winds used in the interpolation
can have bad quality marks.  The resulting interpolated wind will
also be assigned a bad quality mark and thus will not be used in
the lat/lon calculation.
          - If the pressure difference between the bracketing
wind levels exceeds 150 mb, then no interpolation is done.  The
winds remain missing and these levels will not be used in the
lat/lon calculation.
     - Several new quality control checks are applied to the
drift lat/lon calculations:
          - If, in the drift time calculation, either a negative
drift time difference or a greater than one hour drift time
difference is found on the current level as compared to the drift
time on the level below then the current level is skipped and the
drift time and drift lat/lon from the level below are used.
          - If the pressure difference between the valid wind
level below and the current level exceeds 150 mb, then the drift
lat/lon from the valid wind level below are used on all levels
above it, to the top of the profile.  (The drift time is still
calculated on all levels.)
          - At the South Pole station, the balloon drift lat/lon
cannot be calculated.  The reported lat/lon is used on all
levels.  (The drift time is still calculated on all levels.) 
Prior to this, incorrect calculations could be made here.
     - The following quality control checks in the drift lat/lon
calculations were in before, but are still worth noting:
          - On each level, a check is made for a greater than one
degree drift lat or lon difference from the lat/lon on the level
below.  If either are found the level is skipped and the drift
time and drift lat/lon from the level below are used.  (Note that
drift time is also affected by this check.)
          - On each level, a gross check is performed on the
calculated latitude.  If it is either less than -90 degrees or
greater than 90 degrees the level is skipped and the drift time
and drift lat/lon from the level below are used.  (Note that
drift time is also affected by this check.)

- One final point:  The balloon drift calculations are done in
the PREPDATA program and do not have the benefit of CQC on
heights or OIQC on heights and winds.