                                             September 21, 2001

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to IBM-SP Data Preprocessor (PREPDATA)
                (February 17, 2000 Version -- UPDATE # 7)


The February 17, 2000 data preprocessor program (PREPDATA) was
updated for the seventh time.  UPDATE #7 was implemented on the
IBM-SP machine at 12Z on September 25, 2001.  Except where noted,
the changes below affect all five versions: ETA, AVN, FNL, RUC
and CDAS.

**************** I B M - S P   U P D A T E   # 7  ***************

I. OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE

  A. CHANGES TO RADIOSONDE DATA PROCESSING

     1) Corrected an error in calculating radiosonde balloon
drift d-time (balloon drift time minus PREPBUFR center time) for
wind report pressure levels that are also found in the
corresponding mass report.  This time has always been calculated
correctly for the mass report levels.  This is encoded into the
PREPBUFR file under mnemonic HRDR but is currently assimilated
only by the GBL-SSI. [MAIN, FIZZ01]

  B. CHANGES TO SURFACE LAND AND MARINE PROCESSING

     1) The report sequence number (encoded in the PRPEBUFR file
header under mnemonic SQN) is now processed separately for
surface land and marine reports.  Prior to this, it was missing. 
This is not used by any analysis, but is useful for combining
mass and wind reports for the same observation (since they have
the same unique sequence number). [MAIN, SFCDTA]

  C. CHANGES TO SATELLITE-DERIVED WIND REPORT PROCESSING

     1) The report sequence number (encoded in the PRPEBUFR file
header under mnemonic SQN) is now processed for all satellite
wind reports.  Prior to this, it was missing.  This is not used
by any analysis, but is useful for combining mass and wind
reports for the same observation (since they have the same unique
sequence number).  Currently this is not an issue since only wind
data is processed for these data.  [MAIN, GETC06]




  D. CHANGES TO RECONNAISSANCE DATA PROCESSING

     1) The report sequence number (encoded in the PRPEBUFR file
header under mnemonic SQN) is now processed separately for these
data.  Since they are included at the end of the ADPUPA message
type in the PREPBUFR file, the sequence number of the LAST
RAOB/PIBAL/DROPWINSONDE report processed earlier is stored in
COMMON and the sequence numbers for the reconnaissance reports
pick up from that point.  This ensures that all reports in the
ADPUPA message type have a unique sequence number.  Prior to
this, sequence number was missing for these data.  This is not
used by any analysis, but is useful for combining mass and wind
reports for the same observation (since they have the same unique
sequence number). [MAIN, STOROB, GETC06]