                                                 April 27, 2001

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to IBM-SP Data Preprocessor (PREPDATA)
                (February 17, 2000 Version -- UPDATE # 4)


The February 17, 2000 data preprocessor program (PREPDATA) was
updated for the fourth time.  UPDATE #4 was implemented on the
IBM-SP machine at 12Z on April 24, 2001.  Except where noted, the
changes below affect all five versions: ETA, AVN, FNL, RUC and
CDAS.

**************** I B M - S P   U P D A T E   # 4  ***************

I.  GENERAL CHANGES

     1) Namelist switch IQKSLM expanded from length 1 to length 2
array.  Word 1 refers to probability of rain threshold for which
quikSCAT reports will be tossed (same as before).  Word 2 refers
to probability of rain threshold for which quikSCAT reports will
receive a suspect quality marker (3). (Default is 2*101.) [MAIN,
GETSCATT, PARM CARDS]

     2) Now prints a diagnostic if the dewpoint observation is
less than the limit (namelist switch TDLIM) for ACARS, GOES
soundings and surface reports. [MAIN, GETC06, GOESDG, SFCDTA]

     3) Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to return the BUFR
message type as an output argument (SUBSET_r).  It can also be
passed in as an input argument, but it is read only if input
argument IER is -1 (see I.5). This was needed so this subroutine
could read and process tropical/U.K. wind profilers in the last
part of the "proflr" data dump file.  [IW3UNPBF]

     4)  Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to accept the existing
output arguments DSNAME, IDSDAT and IDSDMP_8 as input arguments
but they are read only if input argument IER is -1 (see I.5). 
This was needed so this subroutine could read and process
tropical/U.K. wind profilers in the last part of the "proflr"
data dump file.  [IW3UNPBF]








     5)  Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to read the existing
output argument IER as an input argument the first time it is
called with an new input file unit number (argument NUNIT).  In
this case if IER is -1, this indicates that the file associated
with NUNIT has already been opened by the subroutine W3UNPKB7 and
reports have been processed by W3UNPKB7.  In this case, IW3UNPBF
will continue reading and processing reports from NUNIT.  This
was needed so this subroutine could read and process
tropical/U.K. wind profilers in the last part of the "proflr"
data dump file. [IW3UNPBF]
     Note: Jeff Ator will fix decoder to stamp out VSIG=2/64 for
           tropical/UK profiler levels instead of missing (right
           now IW3UNPBF forces VSIG to be 2 unless it is a
           surface level, then VSIG set to 64.

     6)  Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to correct a bug which
might have prevented a diagnostic print from occurring for cases
when input argument SUBSKP is passed in as TRUE for a particular
BUFR type/subtype.  [IW3UNPBF]

     7) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to return with IER = 8
if the next BUFR message read in has SUBSET (message type) =
NC002009.  These are tropical/U.K. wind profilers (type 002/009)
which cannot be processed by this subroutine.  They can, however,
be processed by subroutine IW3UNPBF when the initial call to it
passes IER = -1, along with the message type, data set name,
center data dump time, and data cutoff time (IW3UNPBF input
arguments SUBSET_r, DSNAME, IDSDAT and IDSDMP_8 respectively)
(see I.3-I.5).  [W3UNPKB7]

     8) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to return the BUFR
message type as an output argument (SUBSET).  This was needed so
the message type for tropical/U.K. wind profilers (NC002009)
could be passed into subroutine IW3UNPBF which needs it upon the
first call with IER = -1 (see I.3).  [W3UNPKB7]

     9) Renamed subroutine PWATER to GETPWATER.  Subroutine
GETPWATER now returns argument IERF=1 if report was not endcoded
into PREPBUFR file (like subroutine FILLX) (before returned
argument MST=0 in this case). [MAIN, GETPWATER, GOESDG, GETSMI]

     10) Namelist switches JPSSMI and XWINDO augmented from (6,3)
to (6,4) where word 3 is new SSM/I rain rate and word 4 is now
SSM/I brightness temperatures (was word 3).  JPSSMI(:,3) defaults
to 9999 (do not process) and XWINDO(:,3) defaults to 300. (see
II.C.4). [MAIN, DATACARDS] 



     11) Subroutine GETSMI streamlined. [MAIN, GETSMI]

     12) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to return in word 5 of
the header, the full date in the form YYYYMMDDHH for wind
profiler, VAD wind, GOES radiance/sounding/retrieval, ERS
scatterometer and quikSCAT scatterometer reports (before, word 5 
returned YYYYMM).  [W3UNPKB7]

     13) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 was modified to return in word 6 of
the header the satellite id (BUFR code table 0-01-007) for GOES
radiance/sounding/retrieval, ERS scatterometer and quikSCAT
scatterometer reports, or missing for wind profiler and VAD wind
reports (before, word 6 returned DDHH for all reports). 
[W3UNPKB7]

     14) Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to return in word 6 of
the header the satellite id (BUFR code table 0-01-007) for all
satellite wind types and for non-superobed SSM/I reports (before,
word 6 was missing as it still is for all other types).
[IW3UNPBF]

     15) For all satellite types (except SSM/I superobed
products), now reads satellite ID from word 6 of header returned
from both W3UNPKB7 (see I.13) and IW3UNPBF (see I.14) and encodes
it into the PREPBUFR file under the mnemonic SAID (BUFR code
table 0-01-007). [MAIN, RPTLBL, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, BUFRTABLE]

     16) Namelist switch SWINDO was dissolved and two new
switches (with the same array sizes) were created called SWINDO_e
(holding the time window for the earliest satwind reports) and
SWINDO_l (holding the time window for the latest satwind
reports).  In both cases, a "-" time means before cycle time and
a "+" time means after cycle time.  This allows the time window
to be asymmetric about the cycle time (see II.B.2). [MAIN, PREP,
SWNTBL, GETC06, DATACARDS]

     17) Subroutine RPTLBL now has input arguments TIMWIN_e
(earliest time window for accepting reports) and TIMWIN_l (latest
time window for accepting reports) instead of the single input
argument TIMWIN.  In both cases, a "-" time means before cycle
time and a "+" time means after cycle time.  All data types
continue to have symmetric time windows about cycle time except
for satwind types (see I.16). [MAIN, RPTLBL, PREP, GETC06,
SATEDS, SATBFR, GOESDG, SFCDTA, GETSMI, GETSCATT]   







II. OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE

  A. CHANGES TO WIND PROFILER DATA PROCESSING

     1) Can now process wind profiler reports in a dump file
containing both NOAA/FSL reports (as before, type 002/007) and
tropical/U.K. reports [new, type 002/009, gets ON29 report type
(T29) 73].  Here's how it is done:
          - W3UNPKB7 reads the NOAA/FSL wind profiler reports as before from
the beginning of the "proflr" data dump file.
          - When W3UNPKB7 reads the first message containing tropical/U.K.
wind profilers (message type NC002009) it immediately returns to PREPDATA with
return code (IER) = 8.
          - The message type (SUBSET_r), data set name (DSNAME), dump center
time (IDSDAT) and dump cutoff time (IDSDMP_8) are also returned to PREPDATA
from W3UNPKB7.
          - SUBSET_r, DSNAME, IDSDAT and IDSDMP_8 are then input to IW3UNPBF
also with input argument IER = -1.  This signals IW3UNPBF to continue reading
and processing the tropical/U.K. profilers from "proflr" until the end of the
file is reached. 

Currently the tropical/U.K. wind profilers (which are received in
PIBAL bulletins) are decoded into the PIBAL tank (002/005), but
the decoder will be changed to tank them to 002/009 soon after
this implementation. [The last implementation of PREPDATA (update
# 3) included a change to recognize the tropical profilers coming
in as PIBALS and give them a report type (TYP) 223 (wind
profiler).  Since then a U.K. profiler site also coming in as a
PIBAL has been identified and this will also be given TYP = 223
(see II.A.2).  This logic will remain even after the decoder
switch so that historical reruns will use these data as wind
profilers.] [MAIN, PREP, UNPREPBF, ISEL, IW3UNPBF, W3UNPKB7]

     2) Added report id 03501 to list of "PIBALs" that are really
wind profilers (in this case U.K.).  It now receives TYP = 223
(wind profiler).  Although the decoder will soon be changed to
tank this and all others as wind profilers under type 002/009
(see II.A.1), this change will remain in place so that historical
reruns work properly. [MAIN, STOROB]

     3) Corrected an oversight in the last implementation of
PREPDATA which had subjected tropical/U.K. wind profilers coming
in disguised as PIBALS (determined by station id) in the ADPUPA
dump file to possible report-time alteration and launch time
caluclation (because the logic was such that the program thought
they were really PIBALS).  This point will soon be mute since in
production these will be in the PROFLR dump file, but the change
is still needed until then and for historical reruns. [MAIN,
RPTLBL]


  B. CHANGES TO SATELLITE DERIVED WIND PROCESSING

     1) All networks except RUC: Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified
to handle the new "ELW" EUMETSAT reports in the "satwnd" dump. 
These originate from BUFR bulletins on the GTS, and contain IR,
visible, and water vapor winds just as the old "SATOB" winds did. 
The main difference is that they are available every 90-minutes
rather than every 6-hours (the time window for the dump of all
EUMETSAT wind types is now expanded to +/- 3-hours in the GBL
networks in order to ensure all data for a day are in the dump
files; see 2 and 3 below for information about the time window in
PREPDATA).  Other differences: 1) the ELW winds have no lower
pressure limit, the SATOB winds have a limit of 995.0 mb; 2) the
ELW can produce WV winds below 400 mb, the SATOB does not; 3) the
ELW produces winds down to a percent confidence of 30% while the
SATOB only produces winds down to 80% (IW3UNPBF flags all ELW
winds between 30% and 80% with quality mark = 13); 4) the ELW
winds can have any auto/manual quality marker while SATOB winds
are produced only when the auto/manual quality marker is "good"
(0-2) (IW3UNPBF flags all ELW winds with auto/manual q.m. > 2
with quality mark = 13).  Even with the filtering, there are
still several hundred more IR winds in the ELW dump for the same
time due to differences in processing.  The routine is designed
such that the SATOB winds can still be processed (a must for
historical reruns).  [IW3UNPBF]

     2) AVN, FNL, CDAS only: The time window for processing
EUMETSAT IR, WV and VIS satwind reports was reduced from +/- 1.5
(AVN, FNL ) or +/- 3.0 (CDAS) hours about cycle time to -1.75 to
to -0.25 hours about cycle time [possible now with new switches
SWINDO_e and SWINDO_l (see I.16)].  This was done so that only
one time set of EUMETSAT winds would be assimilated as before
when the SATOB winds were used (the new ELW winds have a 90-
minute time frequency while the old SATOB winds had a 6-hour time
frequency).  This change also ensures that this time will be the
same time as before, namely 2300, 0500, 1100 or 1700 UTC for 00,
06, 12 and 18Z cycles, respectively.  The SSI is not ready to
handle more than one time set of winds, and using the same time
as before will allow historical reruns picking up the SATOB winds
to still find data. [DATACARDS]   










     3) ETA only: The time window for processing EUMETSAT IR, WV
and VIS satwind reports was reduced from +/- 2.0 hours about
cycle time to - 1.25 to + 0.25 hours about cycle time.  This was
done so that only one time set of EUMETSAT winds would be
assimilated as before when the SATOB winds were used (the new ELW
winds have a 90-minute time frequency while the old SATOB winds
had a 6-hour time frequency).  This change also ensures that this
time will be the same time as before, namely 2300, 0500, 1100 or
1700 UTC for 00, 06, 12 and 18Z center times, respectively in the
Eta and EDAS.  The 90-minute time frequency for the ELW winds now
allows the 03, 09, 15 and 21Z center times in the EDAS to
assimilate winds at 0200, 0800, 1400 and 2000, respectively. 
Prior to this, no SATOB EUMETSAT winds were available at these
times.  (EUMETSAT winds from the west Meteosat are on the eastern
edge of the EDAS domain.)  [DATACARDS]


  C. CHANGES TO SSM/I DATA PROCESSING

     1) AVN, FNL only: Subroutine IW3UNPBF now looks for rain
rate in mnemonic REQ6 (10**6 mm/sec) in the "spssmi" dump file
rather than mnemonic REQV (10**4 mm/sec).  The "spssmi" dump file
has stored REQ6 since 24 January 2001.  (REQV remains a second
choice so historical reruns will work properly.)  IW3UNPBF also
outputs rain rate (category 8, code figure 198) in units of
mm/sec precise to 10**6 rather than in whole mm/hr. [IW3UNPBF]

     2) All networks except CDAS: IW3UNPBF outputs total
precipitable water (category 8, code figure 197) in units of mm
precise to 10**1 rather than mm *10. [IW3UNPBF, MAIN, FILLX,
GETSMI, GETPWATER, FIZZ01]

     3) IW3UNPBF outputs wind speed (category 8, code figure 196)
in units of m/sec precise to 10**1 rather than m/sec *10. 
[IW3UNPBF, MAIN, GETSMI]

     4) AVN, FNL only: Now processes rain rate [read from
"spssmi" file; JPSSMI(:,3)=0 (see I.10)], encoding REQ6 (10**6
mm/sec) in the PREPBUFR file under report type (TYP) 150
(T29=66).  This is not yet assimilated by the SSI, which still
points to the "spssmi" file.  This will change shortly.  Also,
mnemonics REQ6_QM (hardwired to 2), REQ6_FC (missing), REQ6_AN
(missing), REQ6_OE (missing), REQ6_PC ('PREPRO') and REQ6_RC
(missing) added.  [MAIN, PREP, FILLX, GETSMI, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01,
BUFRTABLE, DATACARDS





  D. CHANGES TO GOES DATA PROCESSING

     1) ETA, AVN, FNL only: Subroutine W3UNPKB7 outputs radiances 
(category 13) in units of K precise to 10**2 rather than K * 100.
[W3UNPKB7, MAIN, GOESDG]

     2) ETA, RUC only: Subroutine W3UNPKB7 outputs total and
layered precipitable water (category 8, code figures 251-254) in
units of mm precise to 10**2 rather than mm * 100. [W3UNPKB7,
MAIN, FILLX, GOESDG, GETPWATER, FIZZ01] 

     3) AVN, FNL only: Subroutine W3UNPKB7 outputs skin
temperature (category 8, code figures 255) in units of K precise
to 10**2 rather than K * 100.  Subroutine W3UNPKB7 outputs solar
zenith angle (category 8, code figures 260) in units of degrees
precise to 10**2 rather than degrees * 100.  Subroutine W3UNPKB7
outputs satellite zenith angle (category 8, code figures 261) in
units of degrees precise to 10**2 rather than degrees * 100. 
[W3UNPKB7, MAIN, GOESDG]

     4) ETA, RUC only: Subroutine W3UNPKB7 now returns surface
pressure in units of mb precise to 10**1 in category 8, code
figure 262.  This is now encoded in the PREPBUFR file for
precipitable water reports (TYP=156-159) under the mnemonic PRSS
in units of Pascals.  This was requested by FSL for the RUC
network. [W3UNPKB7, MAIN, FILLX, GOESDG, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01,
BUFRTABLE]


  E. CHANGES TO ACARS DATA PROCESSING

     1) Subroutine IW3UNPBF now returns turbulence index for time
T-1 to T-2 minutes, T-2 to T-1 minutes, T-3 to T-2 minutes and T-
4 to T-3 minutes in category 8, code figures 926-929,
respectively (BUFR code tables 0-11-236, 0-11-237, 0-11-238, 0-
11-239, respecitvely).  These data are now encoded in the
PREPBUFR file under the mnemonics TRBX10, TRBX21, TRBX32 and
TRBX43, respectively. [IW3UNPBF, MAIN, FILLX, GETC06, W3FIZZ,
FIZZ01, BUFRTABLE] 











III. NON-OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE


  A. CHANGES TO SSM/I DATA PROCESSING

     1) Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to unpack sea-surface
temperature from the "spssmi" file (report type 577) and output
it as category 8, code figure 203 in units of K precise to 10**2. 
Currently, the SST product is not present in the "spssmi" file,
but a future change in PREPOBS_PREPSSMI program will process it
from the NCEP product dump file if requested. [IW3UNPBF]

     2) Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to unpack surface
temperature from the "spssmi" file (report type 576) and output
it (category 8, code figure 199) in units of K precise to 10**2
rather than in units of whole K, as before.  [IW3UNPBF]

     3) Subroutine IW3UNPBF was modified to output brightness
temperatures (category 8, code figures 189-195) in units of K
precise to 10**2 rather than in units of K * 100. [IW3UNPBF,
GETSMI]


  B. CHANGES TO GOES DATA PROCESSING

     1) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 outputs lifted index (category 8,
code figures 250) in units of K precise to 10**2 rather than K *
100.   Subroutine W3UNPKB7 outputs cloud top temperature
(category 8, code figures 256) in units of K precise to 10**2
rather than K * 100.  Subroutine W3UNPKB7 outputs cloud top
pressure (category 8, code figures 257) in units of mb precise to
10**1 rather than mb * 10.  [W3UNPKB7]

     2) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 now skips all category 12 sounding
levels if the retrieved geopotential height is less than or equal
to the elevation (defined as the first retrieved level height).
[W3UNPKB7]

     3) Subroutine W3UNPKB7 modified to correct the scaling for
cloud top pressure (was being returned in Pascals, now being
returned in mb precise to 10**1; the comment in the code had
always indicated that it was returned in mb precise to 10**1).
[W3UNPKB7]








  C. CHANGES TO ERS SCATTEROMETER DATA PROCESSING

     1) AVN, FNL only: The data card switch JPERSD has been
changed from 6*0 to 6*9999, turning off the attempt to process
these data.  This data type was turned off in the SSI in early
November 2000 (via setting the observation errors to missing). 
On January 17, 2001, these data were discontinued by ESA.  On
March 7, 2001, these operational ingest and dymp codes were
modified to stop looking for these data. [DATACARDS]
