                                                 March 19, 2002

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to IBM-SP Data Preprocessor (PREPDATA)
                (February 17, 2000 Version -- UPDATE # 11)


The February 17, 2000 data preprocessor program (PREPDATA) was
updated for the eleventh time.  UPDATE #11 was implemented on the
IBM-SP machine at 12Z on March 19, 2002.  Except where noted, the
changes below affect all five versions: ETA, AVN, FNL, RUC and
CDAS.

**************** I B M - S P   U P D A T E   # 11 ***************


I. OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE

  A. CHANGES TO UPPER-AIR (RADIOSONDE, PIBAL, RECONNAISSANCE,     
 DROPWINSONDE), SURFACE LAND, AND AIRCRAFT (AMDAR/ASDAR,      
ACARS) DATA PROCESSING

     1) Interface routine IW3UNPBF is modified to account for
upcoming (May 2002) changes in the ADPUPA, ADPSFC, AIRCFT and
AIRCAR BUFR dump files.  In particular:
          - Future mnemonic HBLCS will be used by Category 7 (cloud
cover data) and Category 51 (surface data) to obtain "height of
lowest cloud seen" if current mnemonic HOCB (height of cloud base)
is not available (and it will not be after the change for all
Category 7 and some Category 51 reports).
          - Future mnemonic TIWM will be used to obtain the
"indicator for source and units for wind speed" by Category 51
(surface data) rather than current mnemonic SUWS.  If TIWM is
missing, then it will try SUWS (allows interface to work properly
prior to the change and for historical reruns).
          - Future mnemonic BORG will be used to obtain "bulletin
being monitored" by Category 8 aircraft data rather than current
mnemonic ICLI (ICAO location identifier).
[IW3UNPBF]


  B. CHANGES TO WIND PROFILER DATA PROCESSING

     1) Interface routine W3UNPKB7 is modified to account for
upcoming (May 2002) changes in the PROFLR BUFR dump files.  In
particular:
          - Category 10 (surface data) will no longer be available
(current mnemonics PMSL, WDIR1, WSPD1, TMDB, REHU and REQV will all
be missing).  The routine will still look for surface data since it
will be available prior to the change and for historical reruns.
          - Current category 11 (upper-air data) mnemonics ACAVH
(horizontal consensus number), ACAVV (vertical consensus number),
SP00 (spectral peak power) and NPHL (mode) will no longer be
available.  The routine will still look for them since they will be
available prior to the change and for historical reruns.
          - Current header mnemonic NPSM (submode) will no longer
be available.  The routine will still look for it since it will be
available prior to the change and for historical reruns.
          - Future mnemonic TPSE will be used to obtain the
averaging time in seconds rather than current mnemonic TPMI
(averaging time in minutes).  If TPSE is missing, then it will try
TPMI (allows interface to work properly prior to the change and for
historical reruns).  In either case, the averaging time in minutes
will be be output by this routine.
          - The number of upper-air levels can be as high as 64
(which it will be after the change).  The current limit is 43 levels.
[W3UNPKB7]


  C. CHANGES TO ATOVS DATA PROCESSING (CDAS ONLY)

     1) Interface routine W3ATOVSUNP is modified to account for
upcoming (May 2002) changes in the ATOVS (soundinga) BUFR dump
files.  In particular:
          - Future mnemonic SAZA will be used to obtain the
satellite zenith angle rather than current mnemonic SZNT.  If SAZA
is missing, then it will try SZNT (allows interface to work
properly prior to the change and for historical reruns).
[W3ATOVSUNP]