                                                February 6, 2007

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to IBM-CCS Data Preprocessor (PREPDATA)
                (September 9, 2004 Version -- UPDATE # 5)


The September 9, 2004 data preprocessor program (PREPDATA) was
updated for the fifth time.  UPDATE #5 was implemented on the
IBM-CCS machines at 12Z on February 6, 2007.  Except where noted, the
changes below affect all eight versions: NAM, NDAS, GFS, GDAS, RUC, CDAS, RTMA
and AFOSPLT.

*************** I B M - C C S   U P D A T E   # 5 **************


I. GENERAL CHANGES

     1) Increased size of arrays SWINDO_e, SWINDO_l, SWNLND, JSWIND and JSMASS
from (6,7,10) to (6,8,10) to allow EUMETSAT satellites to be split into
separate processing for odd (*,5,*) and even (*,6,*) satellites rather than
all EUMETSAT satellites in (*,5,*) as before [(*,7,*) and (*,8,*) now refer to
AQUA and TERRA satellites, respectively instead of (*,6,*) and (*,7,*) as
before] (defaults are same as previous EUMETSAT-all for both odd and even
satellites) [MAIN, DATACARDS, BLOCK]



II. OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE

   A.  CHANGES TO SATELLITE-DERIVED WIND DATA PROCESSING

     1) Modified EUMETSAT processing to consider "odd" and "even" satellites
separately for process/no-process/flag all/flag every-other, time window,
land/no-land, all by lat band and product type. [MAIN, SWNTBL, GETC06,
DATACARDS]

     2) GFS, GDAS, CDAS, CDC, NAM, NDAS only: With the expansion of the
“satwnd” dump to now include EUMETSAT visible and water vapor tanks, the
METEOSAT-5 visible data are now processed and used by the assimilation.  The
METEOSAT-5 WV data are now flagged for non-use by the assimilation. [UPSTREAM
SATWND DUMP]

     3) GFS, GDAS, CDAS, CDC, NAM, NDAS only: IR and visible winds from the
odd EUMETSAT satellite (currently METEOSAT-8) are flagged so they will not be
assimilated by analysis (both even and odd satellites continue to flag water
vapor winds). The METEOSAT-8 will be introduced into the "satwnd" dump within
the next two weeks.  [DATACARDS]

     4) AFOSPLT only: IR and visible winds from the odd EUMETSAT satellite
(currently METEOSAT-8) are tossed so they will not be plotted by AFOSPLT
(since they are not yet assimilated by the GBL-SSI) (both even and odd
satellites continue to toss water vapor winds).  The METEOSAT-8 will be
introduced into the "satwnd" dump within the next two weeks.  [DATACARDS]

     5) GFS, GDAS, AFOSPLT, CDAS, CDC only: EUMETSAT IR, water vapor and
visible satellite winds are now processed with a time window of -0.75 to +0.25
hours about cycle time (the time window had been +/- 0.75 hours about cycle
time).  This change was made because the future METEOSAT-8 wind sets are
available hourly (unlike the METEOSAT-5 wind sets which are available every
90-minutes), and only one wind set time is ever assimilated (here the
METEOSAT-8 wind set from 30-minutes prior to cycle time will be assimilated
once these are ready to be used).  This change does not affect the METEOSAT-5
data.  [DATACARDS]

     6) NAM, NDAS only: EUMETSAT IR, water vapor and visible satellite winds
are now processed with a time window of -0.75 to +0.25 hours about cycle time
(the time window had been -1.25 to +0.25 hours about cycle time).  This change
was made because the future METEOSAT-8 wind sets are available hourly (unlike
the METEOSAT-5 wind sets which are available every 90-minutes), and only one
wind set time is ever assimilated (here the METEOSAT-8 wind set from
30-minutes prior to cycle time will be assimilated once these are ready to be
used).  This change does not affect the METEOSAT-5 data.  [DATACARDS]

     7) GFS, GDAS only: A bug which caused Aqua and Terra MODIS deep-layer
water vapor winds to be treated as though they were cloud-top water vapor
winds (and thus assimilated instead of tossed) was corrected.  As such they
are no longer lumped together with the cloud-top water vapor winds.  The
datacards had been set to toss these, however, since they did not harm the
analysis it was decided that the deep-layer water vapor winds should continue
to be assimilated.  The datacards were changed to process these instead of
toss them.  [IW3UNPBF, DATACARDS]

     8) GFS, GDAS only: Aqua and Terra MODIS IR winds and water vapor
(deep-layer and cloud top) winds are now quality controlled according to the
value of the NESDIS Recursive Filter Function (RFF) read in (like for GOES
satellite-derived winds).  Here, winds with RFF < 50 are marked as bad (13),
winds with RFF 50-55 are marked as suspect (3), winds with RFF 56-84 are
marked as neutral (2), and winds with RFF > 84 are marked as good (1).  Prior
to this, all winds received a neutral quality mark (2). [IW3UNPBF, GETC06]

     9) Modified to handle future GTS GOES winds and future hi-density (BUFR)
JMA winds.  [IW3UNPBF]

    10) Stores percent confidence based on EUMETSAT Quality Index with
forecast consistency test (BUFR code table 0-33-197) in category 8 code figure
356.  [IW3UNPBF]

    11) Stores percent confidence based on EUMETSAT Quality Index without
forecast consistency test (BUFR code table 0-33-198) in category 8 code figure
357.  [IW3UNPBF]

    12) Accounts for EUMETSAT winds now possibly providing an additional
quality indicator - NESDIS Recursive Filter Function (RFF).  [IW3UNPBF]


   B. CHANGES TO GOES SATELLITE SOUNDING PROCESSING

     1) RUC only: GOES-11 cloud-top data are now assimilated (like GOES-12),
they are no longer flagged (switch IRTRV changed from 9999 to 0 for GOES ODD-2
cloud-top data).  [DATACARDS]

     2) RUC only: GOES-11 clear layer precipitable water data are now
assimilated (like GOES-12), they are no longer flagged (switch IRTRV changed
from 9999 to 544 for GOES ODD-2 precipitable water data).  Cloudy layer
precipitable water data from both GOES-11 and GOES-12 continue to be flagged.
[DATACARDS]

     3) NAM, NDAS only: GOES-11 clear layer precipitable water data are no
longer flagged (switch IRTRV changed from 9999 to 0 for GOES ODD-2 layer
precipitable water data).  Like GOES-12 clear layer precipitable water data
(which was already not flagged), they are monitored, but not used, by the
NAM-GSI.  [DATACARDS]

     4) NAM, NDAS only: GOES-11 and GOES-12 cloudy layer precipitable water
data are no longer flagged (switch IRTRV changed from 9999 to 0 for GOES ODD-2
layer precipitable water data and changed from 544 to 0 for GOES EVEN-1 layer
precipitable water data).  They are monitored, but not used, by the NAM-GSI.
[DATACARDS]

