                                                December 4, 2007

MEMORANDUM TO:  Record
FROM:           Dennis A. Keyser -- NP22
Subject:        Changes to IBM-CCS Data Preprocessor (PREPDATA)
                (September 9, 2004 Version -- UPDATE # 6)


The September 9, 2004 data preprocessor program (PREPDATA) was
updated for the sixth time.  UPDATE #6 was implemented on the
IBM-CCS machines at 12Z on December 4, 2007.  Except where noted, the
changes below affect all eight versions: NAM, NDAS, GFS, GDAS, RUC, CDAS, RTMA
and AFOSPLT.

*************** I B M - C C S   U P D A T E   # 6 **************


I. GENERAL CHANGES

     1) Bumped up array size for unpacked report from IW3UNPBF from 3000 to
3500.  [MAIN, UNPREPBF, IW3UNPBF]

     2) Increased size of array AWINDO from (2,4) to (2,6) to account for new
TAMDAR and Canadian AMDAR aircraft data in words 5 and 6, respectively, of the
second dimension (default AWINDO=300.). [MAIN, DATACARDS, BLOCK]

     3) Increased size of arrays AIRLND, JAWIND and JAMASS from (6,4) to (6,6)
to account for new TAMDAR and Canadian AMDAR aircraft data in words 5 and 6,
respectively, of the second dimension (default AIRLND=TRUE, JAWIND=0,
JAMASS=9999). [MAIN, DATACARDS, BLOCK]

     4) Increased size of arrays IACFTL, IACFTH and AIFNOW from (4) to (6) to
account for new TAMDAR and Canadian AMDAR aircraft data in words 5 and 6,
respectively, (default IACFTL=2286, IACFTH=18000 AIFNOW=FALSE). [MAIN,
DATACARDS, BLOCK]

     5) Increased size of arrays FLACMS (1) to (6) to account for all aircraft
types, including new TAMDAR and Canadian AMDAR aircraft data in words 5 and 6,
respectively, (default FLACMS=TRUE) since TAMDAR can have moisture, like MDCRS
ACARS. [MAIN, DATACARDS, BLOCK]

     6) Replaced call to BUFRLIB routine OVRBS1 with call to BUFRLIB routine
PKBS1 (OVRBS1 is obsolete with 1/31/2006 version of BUFRLIB) (this is
currently never called in PREPDATA). [MAIN, W3FIZZ]

     7) Increased size of common block /BITBUF/ arrays IBAY and MBAY from
(5000) and (5000,32) to (12500) and (12500,32), respectively, to match sizes
in this common block in 1/31/2006 version of BUFRLIB. [MAIN, W3FIZZ]

     8) Added new NAMELIST switch JPWDSD(6) to process/not process WINDSAT
scatterometer data (default JPWDSD=6*9999, don’t process). [MAIN, DATACARDS,
BLOCK]

     9) Added new NAMELIST switch IWWNDO(2) to set earliest and latest times
for accepting WINDSAT scatterometer data (default IWWNDO=-3,+3). [MAIN,
DATACARDS, BLOCK]

    10) Modified to handle return of new argument RDATA2 from calls to
W3UNPKB7 [21-word 1-dimensional array which holds additional values decoded
directly from BUFR (and not in "RDATA" array), for some parameters replacing
what had been returned in RDATA array (in the header)]. [MAIN, PREP, FILLX,
GOESDG, GETSCATT, GETGPSIPW, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, W3UNPKB7]

    11) Cases where obs are set to have QM 15 (in order to flag a report for
non-use by analysis even though obs may not necessarily be bad) are now first
checked to make sure obs QM isn't already "bad" (> 3 and < 15).  This prevents
NAM- and GBL-GSI from monitoring truly bad obs which just happen to be in
report groups flagged for non-use by analysis). [MAIN, STOROB, GETC06,
GETPWATER, SFCDTA, FIZZ01]

    12) Added new NAMELIST switch FLDMFR to flag dropwinsonde moisture data on
all levels for non-US/unknown (i.e., non-NOAA and non-USAF) aircraft (default
is TRUE, flag).  (Note: non-US aircraft had been included with USAF aircraft
in NAMELIST switch FLDMAF which now refers exclusively to USAF aircraft).
[MAIN, FIZZ01, DATACARDS, BLOCK]

    13) Expanded array OBS3 (contains multiple-level sensible weather
elements) from (5,255,5) to (5,255,7) and array NOBS3 (contains number of
replications in OBS3 group) from (5) to (7) (these are returned out of call to
IW3UNPBF) to account for processing of additional multiple-level sensible
weather elements containing airframe icing (RECCOs, PIREPs, E-ADAS, Canadian
AMDAR, TAMDAR) and degree of turbulence (RECCOs and all aircraft).  The
expanded turbulence information replaces the single degree of turbulence value
which had been returned from IW3UNPBF in cat. 8, code figure 916. [MAIN,
GETC06, IW3UNPBF]

    14) Added new NAMELIST switch WRMISS (default WRMISS =TRUE).  If TRUE,
then reports with no valid obs (wind/temperature) levels and no valid
brightness temperature channels, but with other ancillary information (e.g.,
sensible weather elements) are now encoded into PREPBUFR file.  This currently
applies only to aircraft reports (mainly PIREPS with turbulence, icing, cloud
info but no temperature or wind information).  Before, such reports without
any data used by the assimilation were always skipped. [MAIN, W3FIZZ,
DATACARDS]

    15) Added namelist switch SKGP45, which, when true (default), skips all
GPS-IPW reports with report time minutes greater than 30 (xx:45 reports
considered to be of poorer quality than xx:15 reports). [MAIN, GETGPSIPW,
DATACARDS]

    16) Accounts for increase in precision for mnemonics DHR and RPT from
10**3 to 10**5 (hours). [MAIN, BUFRTABLE]

    17) W3LIB routine GBLEVENTS (called by PREPDATA) modified as follows:
          a) Reads generalized sigma/hybrid guess files from the GFS using an
updated version of the sigio" utility. 
          b) The generation of observation error encoded in the PREPBUFR file
is now identical to what is done in the GSI (where the NAM version still reads
observation error from an external file).  This will allow the NAM GSI to
eventually be changed to read observation error directly out of the PREPBUFR
file (as is done in GBL) rather than out of an external file.
          c) QM 9 is now assigned to a variable only if its observation error
is missing, or,in the case of moisture, if the level is above pressure level
"QTOP_REJ" or if its temperature observation error is missing.  All other
events (e.g., gross check errors) now assign QM 8 (even if observation error
is missing).  Prior to this, only the rejection of pressure on a level
resulted in QM 8. All other rejections received QM 9.  This change means that
truly "bad" obs will now always get QM 8 and only obs flagged for non-use by
assimilation (but still "good") will now get QM 9.  This is important because
the NAM- and GBL-GSI monitors, but does not use, obs with QM 9.  Meanwhile, it
does not even consider monitoring obs with QM 8.
          d) Corrected an error which mistakenly assigned reason code 9
instead of 3 to moisture with missing observation error.
          e) QM 9 will not be assigned to a variable if that variable already
has a "bad" QM (i.e., > 3 but < 15).  In fact, the "PREVENT" event which would
assign QM 9 is skipped entirely since we do not want the NAM- or GBL-GSI to
monitor any obs which really are "bad".
          f) For non-“ADPUPA” types, QM 9 is now assigned to calculated
virtual temperature obs if the moisture QM is 9 or 15 and the original
sensible temperature is not truly "bad" (i.e. < 4 or 9 or 15).  These "VIRTMP"
events receive new reason code 4.  Prior to this, such obs had received QM 8
with reason code 2, like virtual temperatures calculated from truly "bad"
moisture (i.e. > 3 but not 9 or 15).  This change means that only truly "bad"
virtual temperature obs (i.e. > 3 but not 9 or 15) will now get QM 8, while
virtual temperature obs flagged for non-use by the assimilation (but still
"good") will now get QM 9.  This is important because the NAM- and GBL-GSI
monitors, but does not use, obs with QM 9.  Meanwhile, it does not even
consider monitoring obs with QM 8.
          g) For "ADPUPA" types, QM 3 is now assigned to calculated virtual
temperature obs only if the moisture QM is truly "bad" (i.e. > 3 but not 9 or
15) and, as before, the original sensible temperature QM is 1 or 2 and the
pressure on the level is below 700 mb.  Prior to this, the virtual temperature
obs QM was set to 3 if the moisture QM was 9 or 15 and all other conditions
were met.
          h) For "SATEMP" types, the routine now encodes a simple copy of the
reported (virtual) temperature as a “VIRTMP" event (if DOVTMP is TRUE).  This
vent gets assigned reason code 3 (similar to what is already done for "RASSDA"
types).

    18) The highest FSL quality flags for mesonet and TAMDAR data now result
in a PREPBUFR QM of 2 (neutral) rather than 1 (good).  [IW3UNPBF]

    19) Redefines many BUFR descriptors in PREPBUFR file for Table A/D entries
in order to avoid Table A/D conflicts with other NCEP BUFR tables.
[BUFRTABLE]

    20) Adds the following new Table D descriptors in the PREPBUFR file:
3-48-037 (mnemonic ACID_SEQ) to hold aircraft flight number sequence in AIRCFT
message type; 3-48-038 (mnemonic AFIC_SEQ) to hold aircraft icing sequence in
ADPUPA and AIRCFT message types; 3-48-039 (mnemonic TURB3SEQ) to hold
turbulence sequence #3 in ADPUPA and AIRCFT message types.  [BUFRTABLE] 

    21) Adds the following new Table B descriptors in the PREPBUFR file:
0-33-197 (mnemonic QIFY) to hold percent confidence based on EUMETSAT quality
index with forecast consistency test in SATWND message type; 0-33-198
(mnemonic QIFN) to hold percent confidence based on EUMETSAT quality index
without forecast consistency test in SATWND message type; 0-33-203 (mnemonic
EEQF) to hold percent confidence based on NESDIS expected error in SATWND
message type; 0-20-041 (mnemonic AFIC) to hold airframe icing inside new
sequence AFIC_SEQ in ADPUPA and AIRCFT message types; 0-20-194 (mnemonic HBOI)
to hold height of bottom of icing layer inside new sequence AFIC_SEQ in ADPUPA 
and AIRCFT message types; 0-20-195 (mnemonic HTOI) to hold height of top of
icing layer inside new sequence AFIC_SEQ in ADPUPA and AIRCFT message types;
0-11-032 (mnemonic HBOT) to hold height of bottom of turbulence layer inside
new sequence TURB3SEQ in ADPUPA and AIRCFT message types; 0-11-033 (mnemonic
HTOT) to hold height of top of turbulence layer inside new sequence TURB3SEQ
in ADPUPA and AIRCFT message types.  [BUFRTABLE]

    22) Changes attributes in the following existing Table B descriptors in
the PREPBUFR file: 0-55-009 (mnemonic TSB, holds PREPBUFR report subtype in
header in all message types) has bit width increased from 3 to 10 since this
will eventually hold up to 3-digit numbers; 0-07-250 [mnemonic POE, holds
pressure observation error (mb) in pressure level sequence in all message
types except GPSIPW] has scale and bit width increased from 1 and 10, to 2 and
14, respectively, to provide more precision for the GSI; 0-04-215 [mnemonic
DHR, holds observation time minus cycle time (hr) in header in all message
types] has scale and bit width increased from 3 and 16, to 5 and 23,
respectively, to provide more precision for subsequent quality control modules
and for the GSI; 0-04-214 [mnemonic RPT, holds reported observation time (hr)
in header in all message types] has scale and bit width increased from 3 and
16, to 5 and 22, respectively, to provide more precision for subsequent
quality control modules and for the GSI.  [BUFRTABLE]

    23) Existing Table D descriptor 3-48-009 defined from mnemonic RFFL_SEQ
(NESDIS Recursive Filter Function Sequence) to PCCF_SEQ (Satellite Wind
Percent Confidence Sequence).  This is done because it is now expanded to
include new Table B mnemonics QIFY, QIFN and EEQF (in addition to existing
Table B mnemonic RFFL) (see I.21 above).  [BUFRTABLE]



II. OPERATIONAL CHANGES SPECIFIC TO A DATA TYPE

   A.  CHANGES TO SATELLITE-DERIVED WIND DATA PROCESSING

     1) Handles high-density JMA satellite winds derived from BUFR bulletins
in input dump message types NC005044-NC005046 which are now in the input
"satwnd" dump file.  These replace low-density JMA winds derived from SATOB
bulletins in input dump message types NC005041-NC005043 which are no longer in
the input "satwnd" dump file.  (This code can now handle either BUFR or SATOB
JMA winds.)  [MAIN, PREP]

     2) Accounts for JMA (new high-density, derived from BUFR bulletins in
input dump message types NC005044-NC005046) and EUMETSAT [Meteosat Second
Generation (MSG) (METEOSAT-8 and up)] satellite-derived winds now containing
the NESDIS Recursive Filter Function (RFF) quality indicator.  The QC tests
for RFF remain limited only to the NESDIS GOES and NASA/POES satellite-derived
winds at this time. [MAIN, GETC06]

     3) Handles new Indian satellites KALPANA-1 (BUFR satellite id 440, has
prefix character “K” in station id) and INSAT-3A (BUFR satellite id 470, has
prefix character "V" in station id). [MAIN, GETC06, IW3UNPBF]
          a) GFS, GDAS only: These data (IR at least, visible and water
vapor not yet available from India) are once again recognized and can be
processed if present.  (The GFS/GDAS GSI is set to monitor these based on
settings in the GBL convinfo file.  These data are never in the NAM, NDAS or
RUC "satwnd" dump files (they are outside these domains anyway).  [MAIN,
GETC06, IW3UNPBF]

     4) Added the reading in, listing, and encoding into PREPBUFR the percent
confidence based on: EUMETSAT Quality Index with forecast consistency test
(read from cat. 8 code figure 356, encoded using mnemonic "QIFY"); EUMETSAT
Quality Index without forecast consistency test (read from cat. 8 code figure
357, encoded using mnemonic "QIFN"); and NESDIS Expected Error (read from cat.
8 code figure 358, encoded using mnemonic "EEQF"). (Note: EEQF is not yet
available operational input "satwnd" dump.)  [MAIN, FILLX, GETC06, W3FIZZ,
FIZZ01, BUFRTABLE]
          a) Stores percent confidence based on NESDIS Expected Error (BUFR
code table 0-33-203) in cat. 8 code figure 358.  This is not yet available in
operational input "satwnd" dump.  [IW3UNPBF] 

     5) GFS, GDAS only: EUMETSAT MET-8 satellite IR and visible winds are no
longer flagged (switch JSWIND changed from 99 to 0). (MET-8 is not
operational, but even if it were GFS/GDAS GSI is set to monitor these based on
the settings in the GBL convinfo file.  NAM and NDAS continue to flag MET-8 IR
and vis winds because otherwise they would be used in the NAM/NDAS GSI based
on the settings in the NAM convinfo file.)  [DATACARDS]

     6) GFS, GDAS only: EUMETSAT MET-9 satellite IR and visible winds are no
longer flagged (switch JSWIND changed from 199 to 0).  (MET-9 is operational
and GFS/GDAS GSI is set monitor these based on the settings in the GBL
convinfo file.  NAM and NDAS continue to flag MET-9 IR and vis winds because
otherwise they would be used in the NAM./GSI based on the settings in the NAM
convinfo file.)  [DATACARDS]

     7) GFS, GDAS, NAM, NDAS only: All EUMETSAT satellite water vapor winds
are no longer flagged (switch JSWIND changed from 99 to 0).  (Both the
GFS/GDAS and NAM/NDAS GSI are set monitor these based on the settings in the
GBL and NAM convinfo files.)  [DATACARDS]

     8) GFS, GDAS only: Indian satellite IR, visible and water vapor winds are
no longer flagged (switch JSWIND changed from 99 to 0).  (GFS/GDAS GSI is set
to monitor these based on settings in the GBL convinfo file.  NAM and NDAS do
not use these as they are not in their "satwnd" dump file.)  [DATACARDS]

     9) GFS, GDAS, NAM, NDAS only: JMA satellite water vapor winds are no
longer flagged (switch JSWIND changed from 99 to 0).  (Both the GFS/GDAS and
NAM/NDAS GSI are set monitor these based on the settings in the GBL and NAM
convinfo files.)  [DATACARDS]

    10) GFS, GDAS, NAM, NDAS only: All GOES satellite visible winds are no
longer flagged (switch JSWIND changed from 99 to 0).  (Both the GFS/GDAS and
NAM/NDAS GSI are set monitor these based on the settings in the GBL and NAM
convinfo files.)  [DATACARDS]

    11) NAM, NDAS only: MODIS (Aqua and Terra) satellite IR and water vapor
(cloud-top and deep-layer) are now processed over land and water at all
latitudes (switch JSWIND changed from 9999 to 0, switch SWNLND changed from
6*F to 6*T).  (NAM/NDAS GSI is set to monitor IR and cloud-top water-vapor
winds and not yet even monitor deep-layer water vapor winds based on settings
in the NAM convinfo file.  GFS/GDAS GSI continues to use these as before.) 
[DATACARDS]

    12) Changes in response to NESDIS' 3/10/2005 correction of an error which
had stored "satellite instrument used in data processing" (mnemonic SIDP) as a
code table value rather than correctly as a flag table value.  The change by
NESDIS had resulted in the instrument type being stored as missing and the
report id not being indexed in PREPBUFR files.  This change in PREPDATA is
such that it will still work properly for historical runs prior to the 2005
NESDIS fix.  (Note: The logic changed here is actually never used any more
since the upstream dump program BUFR_DUPSAT has, since 12/2000, created the
report id, and the instrument type is now obtained from the station id.)
[IW3UNPBF]

    13) Changes to handle JMA's 7/15/2005 satellite switch from GOES-9 (BUFR
satellite id 253) to MTSAT-1R (BUFR satellite id 171, has prefix character "Q"
in station id).  [IW3UNPBF]


   B. CHANGES TO GOES SATELLITE SOUNDING PROCESSING

     1) Can now handle GOES 1x1 field-of-view soundings/PW/radiances in input
dump message type NC003003.  GOES soundings/PW/radiances will be processed
only if input dump message type is NC003001 (5x5 field-of-view) or NC003003
(1x1 field-of-view).  GOES cloud-top retrievals will be processed only if
input BUFR message type is NC003002.  (This distinction is necessary for cases
when GOES 1x1 field-of-view soundings/PW/radiances are intermingled with GOES
1x1 field-of-view cloud-top retrievals in the input "goesnd" dump file since
the GOES 1x1 field-of-view  soundings/PW/radiances can/may also contain
cloud-top retrieval data which we do NOT want to process.)  (Note: The input
"goesnd" dump file is expected to never contain GOES 1x1 field-of-view
soundings/PW/radiances.  These are being dumped into the new "goesfv" file
which will be read directly by the GSI rather than first by PREPDATA.)
[MAIN. GOESDG]

     2) GFS, GDAS only: Turned off the processing of obsolete GOES 5x5
field-of-view radiances.  The input “goesnd” dump file is no longer read. The
GFS/GDAS GSI has, for some time now, read GOES 1x1 field-of-view radiances
directly out of the “goesfv” dump files.  (NAM and NDAS continue to read GOES
5x5 field-of-view radiances out of the "goesnd" dump files.) [DATACARDS]

     3) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded GOES 5x5 field-of-view overland, clear
(PREPBUFR report type 156) PW observation error is set to same value as in
external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI (8 mm) (it had been set
to another non-missing value).  (NAM/NDAS GSI is set to monitor this based on
settings in the NAM convinfo file.)   (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like
current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than
out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]

     4) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded GOES 5x5 field-of-view overland, cloudy
(PREPBUFR report type 157) PW observation error is set to 8 mm (it had been
missing here and remains missing in the external observation error file read
by the NAM/NDAS GSI).  (NAM/NDAS GSI is set to monitor this based on settings
in the NAM convinfo file, so there is no need to set observation error to
missing.)   (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current GFS/GDAS GSI, read
observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of external file.)
[GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]


  C. CHANGES TO AIRCRAFT PROCESSING

     1) Handles new TAMDAR aircraft if switched on (PREPBUFR report type
134/234). Encodes new parameters TRBX [turbulence index, BUFR code table
0-11-235, stored by IW3UNPBF into cat. 8 code figure 930 with indicator 2
containing its QM (0-15)] and ROLF (roll angle flag, BUFR code table 0-02-199,
stored by IW3UNPBF into cat. 8 code figure 931) into PREPBUFR file.  [MAIN,
FILLX, GETC06, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, BUFRTABLE, IW3UNPBF]
          a) GFS, GDAS, NAM, NDAS only: Mass and wind data processed over +/-
3.25 hour time window, moisture is NOT flagged [switches JAMASS(*,5) and
JAWIND(*,5) set to 0].  (The GFS/GDAS GSI is set to monitor temperature,
moisture and wind based on settings in the GBL convinfo file.  The NAM/NDAS
GSI does not yet even monitor any of these based on settings in the NAM
convinfo file.)  [DATACARDS]

     2) Handles new Canadian AMDAR aircraft if switched on (PREPBUFR report
type 135/235).  [MAIN, FILLX, GETC06, IW3UNPBF]
          a) GFS, GDAS, NAM, NDAS only: Mass and wind data processed over +/-
3.25 hour time window, no moisture [switches JAMASS(*,6) and JAWIND(*,6) set
to 0].  [The GFS/GDAS GSI is set to monitor temperature, moisture (not
available) and wind these based on settings in the GBL convinfo file.  The
NAM/NDAS GSI does not yet even monitor any of these based on settingsin the
NAM convinfo file.]  [DATACARDS]

     3) CDAS, CDS only: Now flags all aircraft reports as bad if the wind is
missing but the temperature is present when switch AIFNOW is FALSE (before
only did so for MDCRS ACARS, and tossed all other types due to concern about
PREPACQC code).  (Note: AIFNOW is now set to TRUE for all other networks
meaning such reports are now processed; see II.C.6 below.)  [MAIN. GETC06]

     4) GFS, GDAS, AFOSPLT only: MDCRS ACARS moisture is no longer flagged.
(GFS/GDAS GSI is set to monitor this based on settings in the GBL convinfo
file.  This is now the same as in the NAM and NDAS which had already removed
the flag on this since it is also set to monitor in the NAM/NDAS GSI based on
settings in the NAM convinfo file.)  [DATACARDS]

     5) Now flags all aircraft reports as bad if below the “floor” level
(before only did so for MDCRS ACARS, and tossed all other types due to concern
about PREPACQC code)  [MAIN. GETC06]

     6) All types except CDAS, CDS: All aircraft type temperature reports will
now be processed when the wind data are missing (switches AIFNOW changed from
6*FALSE to 6*TRUE).  [Prior to this, such reports had been tossed (except for
MDCRS ACARS which had been flagged).  All such reports would now be flagged if
AIFNOW is FALSE, per change II.C.3 above.]  [MAIN, GETC06, DATACARDS]

     7) All types except CDAS, CDS, HOURLY, AFOSPLT: Aircraft reports with
missing wind and temperature are now encoded into PREPBUFR file as a mass
report if other ancillary information (e.g., sensible weather elements such as
turbulence, icing, cloud) is present (new switch WRMISS is set to TRUE).
(Note: this is mainly true only for PIREPs.)  (Prior to this, all reports with
missing wind and temperature were skipped.)  [MAIN, GETC06, DATACARDS]

     8) New multiple-level sensible weather elements containing airframe icing
(RECCOs, PIREPs, E-ADAS, Canadian AMDAR, TAMDAR), encoded into PREPBUFR file
using new mnemonics AFIC, HBOI and HTOI (type of icing, height of bottom and
top of icing layer) and degree of turbulence (RECCOS and all aircraft),
encoded into PREPBUFR file using existing mnemonic DGOT (degree of turbulence)
and new mnemonics HBOT and HTOT (height of bottom and top of turbulence
layer).  [MAIN, GETC06, W3FIZZ]

     9) AFOSPLT only: MDCRS ACARS mass data (PREPBUFR report type 133) will
now be processed globally [switch JAMASS(:,4) changed from 9999 to 0].
[DATACARDS]

    10) AFOSPLT only: MDCRS ACARS wind data (PREPBUFR type 233) will now be
processed in the Southern Hemisphere [switch JAWIND(1:3,4) changed from 9999
to 0]. (Had only been processed in Northern Hempishere.)  [DATACARDS]

    11) Accounts for ARINC scaling mixing ratio incorrectly in MDCRS ACARS
reports (10 times too large) between 11/1/2006 and 10/1/2007.  Compensates for
this by dividing the mixing ratio read from the input "aircar" dump file
during this time period by 10. All MDCRS ACARS mixing ratios read on
10/2/2007, the day ARINC made their fix, or read from 10/1/2006 through
10/31/2006, the month when the error was introduced by ARINC, are set to
missing since there is uncertainty during these times as to whether the mixing
ratio was scaled correctly or incorrectly by ARINC.  (Note: This change
benefits only historical reruns and reanalysis runs.)  [IW3UNPBF]

    12) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded moisture observation error for MCCRS ACARS
reports (PREPBUFR report type 133) is set to 20% (RH) on all levels (it had
been missing here and remains missing in the external observation error file
read by the NAM/NDAS GSI).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current
GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of
external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]

    13) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded AIREP/PIREP (PREPBUFR report type 130/230),
E-ADAS, ASDAR/AMDAR (PREPBUFR report type 131/231) and MDCRS ACARS (PREPBUFR
report type 133/233) temperature and wind observation errors on all levels are
set to same values as in external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI
(they had been set to other non-missing values).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI
will, like current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file
rather than out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]


  D. CHANGES TO DROPWINDSONDE PROCESSING

     1) Fixed a bug which stored balloon drift coordinates from the previous
RAOB/PIBAL report into a dropwinsonde report.  The DROPs should always have
missing balloon drift coordinates.  [MAIN, FIZZ01]

     2) Existing NAMELIST switch FLDMGS [providing the option to flag NOAA
(P-3 and Gulf Stream) aircraft dropwinsonde moisture on all levels] has been
more precisely defined to ensure only NOAA aircraft are affected by this
switch.  [MAIN, FIZZ01]

     3) Existing NAMELIST switch FLDMAF (providing the option to flag USAF
aircraft dropwinsonde moisture on all levels) is now defined such that only
USAF aircraft are affected by this switch.  (Prior to this, it had affected
all non-NOAA aircraft, including foreign and unknown.)  [MAIN. FIZZ01]

     4) NAM, NDAS, AFOSPLT only: NOAA (P-3 and Gulf Stream) dropwinsonde
moisture is no longer automatically flagged on every level (switch FLDMGS
changed from TRUE to FALSE). It will now be used by the NAM/NDAS GSI (as has
already been the case in the GFS/GDAS GSI.)  [DATACARDS]

     5) GFS, GDAS, NAM, NDAS, AFOSPLT only: USAF dropwinsonde moisture is no
longer automatically flagged on every level (switch FLDMAF changed from TRUE
to FALSE).  It will now be used by both the GFS/GDAS and NAM/NDAS GSI.
[DATACARDS]

     6) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded DROP and RECCO temperature and wind
observation errors on all levels are set to same values as in external
observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI (they had been set to other
non-missing values).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current GFS/GDAS
GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of external
file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]


 E. CHANGES TO GPS-IPW PROCESSING

     1) GFS, GDAS only: These data are now processed (switch JPGPSD changed
from 6*9999 to 6*0).  (GFS/GDAS GSI is set to monitor these based on settings
in the GBL convinfo file.  NAM/NDAS GSI and RUC 3DVAR continue to use these as
before.)  [DATACARDS]

     2) All GPS-IPW reports with report time minutes greater than 30 are now
skipped (switch "SKGP45" set to TRUE).  (Report times are always at 15 and 45
minutes past each hour.  The reports at 45 minutes past each hour are
considered to be of poorer quality than the reports at 15 minutes past each
hour.)  [MAIN, GETGPSIPW, DATACARDS]


 F. CHANGES TO RASS PROCESSING

     1) GFS, GDAS only: These data are now processed (switch RASS changed
from FALSE to TRUE).  (GFS/GDAS GSI is set to monitor these based on settings
in the GBL convinfo file.  NAM, NDAS and RUC process these as before.  The
NAM/NDAS GSI still does not yet even monitor these based on settings in the
NAM convinfo file.  RUC 3DVAR continues to use these.)  [DATACARDS]

     2) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded temperature observation error on all levels is
set to same value as in external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI
(it had been missing).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current GFS/GDAS
GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of external
file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]  


 G. CHANGES TO QUIKSCAT SCATTEROMETER WIND PROCESSING

     1) NAM, NDAS only: These data are now processed (switch JPQKSD changed
from 6*9999 to 6*0).  (NAM/NDAS GSI is set to monitor these based on settings
in the NAM convinfo file.  GFS/GDAS GSI continues to use these as before.)
[DATACARDS]


 H. CHANGES TO WINDSAT SCATTEROMETER WIND PROCESSING

     1) Handles Navy pr NESDIS WindSAT data if switched on (PREPBUFR report
type 289, read from new "wdsatr" dump file in either message type NC012138
(Navy) or NC012139 (NESDIS), gets dump report type 583]. Encodes new
parameters MRWVC, MRLWC, WSST, MWD10, MWS10, WSEQC1, CHSQ, PHER, SPDE, SSTE,
CLDE and VPRE into PREPBUFR file, under new message type WDSATR.  [MAIN, PREP,
FILLX, GETSCATT, W3FIZZ, FIZZ01, BUFRTABLE, W3UNPKB7]
          a) GFS, GDAS only: Navy WindSAT data processed over +/- 3.00 hour
time window (new switch JPWDSD set to 6*0).  (GFS/GDAS GSI is set to monitor
these based on settings in the GBL convinfo file.  They are currently not
processed in any other network.)  [DATACARDS]


 I. CHANGES TO UPPER-AIR RADIOSONDE AND PIBAL PROCESSING

     1) Fixed bug which prevented “part” receipt times from being stored
properly for ADPUPA types.  [IW3UNPBF]

     2) Bumped up the maximum number of levels that can be processed for a
"category" (i.e., mandatory levels, significant temperature levels,
winds-by-pressure levels, winds-by-height levels) from 200 to 300.  [IW3UNPBF]

     3) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded radiosonde temperature, moisture, surface
pressure and wind observation errors on all levels are set to same values as
in external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI (they had been set to
other non-missing values).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current
GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of
external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]

     4) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded PIBAL wind observation error on all levels is
set to same value as in external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI
(it had been set to another non-missing value).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI
will, like current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file
rather than out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]


 J. CHANGES TO MESONET PROCESSING

     1) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded temperature and surface pressure observation
errors are set to same values as in external observation error file read by
NAM/NDAS GSI (they had been missing).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like
current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than
out of external file.  The NAM/NDAS GSI still does not yet even monitor these
based on settings in the NAM convinfo file.)  [GBLEVENTS,
prepobs_errtable.nam]

     2) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded moisture observation error is set to 7% (RH)
(it had been missing here and remains set to 5.912% in the current external
observation error file read by the NAM/NDAS GSI but will be changed to 7% in
the next NAM GSI bundle).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current
GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of
external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]

     3) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded wind observation error is set to 3 m/sec (it
had been missing here and remains set to 2.628 m/sec in the current external
observation error file read by the NAM/NDAS GSI but will be changed to 3 m/sec
in the next NAM GSI bumdle).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current
GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of
external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]


 K. CHANGES TO SURFACE LAND PROCESSING

     1) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded surface land with estimated station pressure
(PREPBUFR report type 183) station pressure observation error is set to 0.5389
mb (it had been missing here and remains missing in the external observation
error file read by the NAM/NDAS GSI).  (NAM/NDAS GSI is set to monitor this
based on settings in the NAM convinfo file, so there is no need to set
observation error to missing.)   (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current
GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of
external file.)  
          a) NAM, NDAS only:  As a result of this change, surface land with
estimated station pressure (PREPBUFR report type 183) temperature and moisture
are now being assimilated by the NAM/NDAS GSI.  Prior to this, temperature was
not used and not even monitored (even though it had a non-missing observation
error) because it had QM 8, and moisture was only being monitored (even though
it too had a non-missing observation error) because it had QM 9.  (The NAM
convinfo file has always been set to use temperature and moisture.)  Moisture,
and initially temperature, had received QM 9 because of a rule stating that
all mass observations receive QM 9 when the surface pressure has a missing
observation error regardless of whether or not they themselves have a missing
observation error.  Temperature then received a QM 8 in the course of its
being converted from sensible to virtual because moisture had a QM > 3.
[GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]

     2) GFS, GDAS only: As a result of change I.17.f above, surface land with
estimated station pressure (PREPBUFR report type 183) temperature now has QM 9
and thus is now being monitored by the GFS/GDAS GSI.  Prior to this, it had QM
8 and was not monitored (and obviously not used) by the GFS/GDAS GSI.  (The
GBL convinfo file has always been set to monitor this temperature.)  It had
initially received, and continues to initially receive, QM 9 because of a rule
stating that all mass observations receive QM 9 when the surface pressure has
a missing observation error regardless of whether or not they themselves have
a missing observation error.  It then received an updated QM 8 in the course
of its being converted from sensible to virtual because moisture had a QM > 3.
The update to GBLEVENTS now sets this QM to 9 because the moisture QM is 9.
[GBLEVENTS]

     3) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded surface land SYNOP with report station
pressure (PREPBUFR report type 181/281) and surface land METAR (PREPBUFR
report type 187/287) temperature, moisture, surface pressure and wind
observation errors are set to same values as in external observation error
file read by NAM/NDAS GSI (they had been set to other non-missing values).
(Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation
errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS,
prepobs_errtable.nam]

     4) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded surface land with estimated station pressure
(PREPBUFR report type 183/284) temperature, moisture and wind observation
errors are set to same values as in external observation error file read by
NAM/NDAS GSI (they had been set to other non-missing values).  (Eventually
NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of
PREPBUFR file rather than out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS,
prepobs_errtable.nam]


 L. CHANGES TO SURFACE MARINE PROCESSING

     1) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded ship, buoy, C-MAN, tide gauge (PREPBUFR report
type 180/280) temperature, moisture, surface pressure and wind observation
errors are set to same values as in external observation error file read by
NAM/NDAS GSI (they had been set to other non-missing values).  (Eventually
NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of
PREPBUFR file rather than out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS,
prepobs_errtable.nam]

     2) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded splash-level dropwinsonde (PREPBUFR report
type 182) temperature, moisture and surface pressure observation errors are
set to same values as in external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI
(they had been set to other non-missing values).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI
will, like current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file
rather than out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]

     3) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded ATLAS buoy (PREPBUFR report type 282) wind
observation error is set to same value as in external observation error file
read by NAM/NDAS GSI (it had been set to another non-missing value).
(Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation
errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS,
prepobs_errtable.nam]


 M. CHANGES TO SSM/I WIND SPEED PROCESSING

     1) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded wind observation error is set to same value as
in external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI (it had been set to
another non-missing value).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current
GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of
external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]


 N. CHANGES TO WIND PROFILER PROCESSING

     1) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded PROFILER decoded from PIBAL bulletin (PREPBUFR
report type 229) wind observation error on all levels is set to same value as
in external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI (it had been set to
another non-missing value).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like current
GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than out of
external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]


 O. CHANGES TO VAD WIND PROCESSING

     1) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded wind observation error on all levels is set to
same value as in external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI (it had
been set to another non-missing value).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like
current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than
out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]


 P. CHANGES TO TROPICAL CYCLONE BOGUS WIND PROCESSING

     1) NAM, NDAS only: Encoded wind observation error on all levels is set to
same value as in external observation error file read by NAM/NDAS GSI (it had
been set to another non-missing value).  (Eventually NAM/NDAS GSI will, like
current GFS/GDAS GSI, read observation errors out of PREPBUFR file rather than
out of external file.)  [GBLEVENTS, prepobs_errtable.nam]


